--- Page 201 ---

14
Optimization Techniques
 
14.1
Reduce the Number of Voices
 
Although a single oscillator with 8 voices will not be as heavy on the CPU as 8 monophonic
oscillators, the general principal still applies: More voices leads to a greater load on the CPU.
If the instrument you are creating does not need a high level of polyphony, try setting the num-
ber of voices to just the number you need.
1.
Reduce the number of Voices in the Ensemble Properties.
14.1.1
Automatic Voice Reduction
 
Automatic Voice Reduction reduces the number of voices in an Ensemble until the CPU level
is below the Max CPU value (which is defined in the Preferences window).
1.
Click on the Automatic Voice Reduction option in the Ensemble Properties to activate Au-
tomatic Voice Reduction.
⇨REAKTOR will reduce the number of Voices until the CPU level drops below the Maximum
threshold. It will continue to do this until the Automatic Voice Reduction option is un-
checked.
Optimization Techniques
Reduce the Number of Voices
 
REAKTOR 6 - Building In Primary - 201


--- Page 202 ---

14.1.2
Use Monophonic Processing
 
You should only use polyphonic Modules when it is a necessity. If you are building an FX unit,
or a mono-synth, you do not need 16 voices all doing the same thing. And even for a poly-
synth, you may only need the oscillators, envelopes and filters to be polyphonic; any LFOs or
effects could be processed as mono signals.
See section ↑2.4, Mono and Poly Modes ↑2.4, Mono and Poly Modes for more informa-
tion about polyphony.
14.2
Use Events Rather than Audio signals
 
When processing at the audio rate, calculations are made constantly at the sampling rate.
Events are only processed when a value is triggered, and are also processed at a slower rate. If
the process you are performing does not directly interact with the audio stream, consider proc-
essing with events.
14.3
Eliminate Superfluous Events
 
In REAKTOR it is sometimes possible to generate Events even if the value is not changing, or
to generate multiple Events from a single process.
14.3.1
Filtering Duplicate Values
 
If you see an area in which this could occur, try using a Step Filter Module.
The Step Filter Module
Optimization Techniques
Reduce the Number of Voices
 
REAKTOR 6 - Building In Primary - 202


--- Page 203 ---

This Module blocks all Events which carry a value that is within a certain tolerance interval
from the value carried by the last Event at its input. The tolerance interval is set at the Tol
input port. With the value 0 at the Tol input port, the Step Filter Module blocks all Events that
carry the same value as the previous Event.
14.3.2
Triggering Values
 
Another way to filter unwanted Events is to use a combination of the Order Module and the
Value Module.
In the following Structure, moving the Knob will produce two Events at the Multiply Module's
output.
By adding an Order Module and a Value Module as illustrated below, you can effectively block
the output of the Multiply Module until it has finished its calculations.
14.4
Use the Display Clock
 
If your ensemble has a complex display element that updates frequently, it can be beneficial
to use the Display Clock.
REAKTOR's GUI processes function at around 25 frames per second (though this value can
fluctuate depending on the instrument that is loaded). This means that, at most, the panel up-
dates itself 25 times in a second.
Optimization Techniques
Eliminate Superfluous Events
 
REAKTOR 6 - Building In Primary - 203


--- Page 204 ---

The System Info Module includes an output called DClk (Display Clock) that sends an Event
before each display update. You can use this clock to trigger any GUI processes in your struc-
ture, thereby only calculating them when necessary.
An Example of Using the Display Clock
In the example above, the LFO is driving a display process, but this process does not need to
happen at the Audio Rate at which the LFO runs. The Display Clock is used to effectively
down-sample the LFO value at the Display Rate, making the display process more efficient.
14.5
Reduce the Control Rate
 
The Control Rate is the rate at which Events are processed. By default this is set to 400Hz
(400 times a second). Reducing the Control Rate means that Event signals will be processed
more slowly, reducing the strain on your CPU.
Optimization Techniques
Reduce the Control Rate
 
REAKTOR 6 - Building In Primary - 204


--- Page 205 ---

1.
You can reduce the Control Rate from the Settings Menu:
14.6
Use Multipliers Instead of Dividers
 
Division is a more expensive process for a CPU to handle than a multiplication. For example, it
would be a lot more efficient to multiply by 0.5 rather than divide by 2, even though the result
is the same.
14.7
Avoid unnecessary use of Send/Receive Modules
 
Send and Receive Modules can be used to make wireless connections in your structure. This
can be appealing for many uses, including improving the readability of your structure.
The Send and Receive Modules
However, overusing these Modules can cause your Ensemble to have a long loading time. They
also make it difficult to debug your structure, so use them where necessary, but try not to use
them frivolously.
Optimization Techniques
Use Multipliers Instead of Dividers
 
REAKTOR 6 - Building In Primary - 205


--- Page 206 ---

14.8
Use the Modulo Module instead of Wrap options
 
Some Modules that use indices (like the Multi Display or the Event Table) contain an option in
their properties to wrap indices that are out of bounds. So if you had an Event Table with a
table of 5 elements, and you sent an index value of 6 to the RX input, the Module would wrap
this value around to become a 1.
In some cases, like a step sequencer, this behavior is desired. Unfortunately, this process is
CPU Intensive and it is much more efficient to use the Modulo Module instead.
The Event Table and the Audio Table both have the wrap option selected by default.
Optimization Techniques
Use the Modulo Module instead of Wrap options
 
REAKTOR 6 - Building In Primary - 206

