--- Page 140 ---

9
A Quick Guide to Initialization
 
Initialization was mentioned briefly in section ↑2.5.4, Event Initialization Order ↑2.5.4, Event
Initialization Order. It is the process that occurs immediately after you load an Ensemble.
Initialization is particularly important for Events signals and Event Modules, especially in com-
plex structures. It is important to be mindful of the initialization process - an Ensemble that
works fine while it is being built, may experience odd behavior when it is closed and re-loaded.
As an example, in normal circumstances the Add Module sends an Event when an Event ar-
rives at either input port. Even in the example shown below, the Add Module will output two
Events when the Knob sends one, although they will happen almost simultaneously.
However, during initialization, the Add Module will preemptively look at all the values at its in-
puts and send a single Event from its output port.
Initialization of the Order Module
The Order Module exhibits special behavior during initialization.
You may have already used the Order Module in the earlier tutorials, but they did not
explain initialization.
The Order Module only sends an Event from its 1 output port during the actual initialization
procedure. The Events from the 2 and 3 output ports come later.
It is also important to note that this affects Modules that come before the Order Module.
With the Show Event Init Order option active, you can see this in effect:
A Quick Guide to Initialization
 
REAKTOR 6 - Building In Primary - 140


--- Page 141 ---

Initialization of the Merge Module
Another Module that has special behavior at initialization is the Merge Module. As with the
Add Module example, it sends only one Event during initialization. As a result, the Merge Mod-
ule cannot behave like it does during normal operation, that is, to forward all Events to its out-
put. It only forwards the Event from the bottommost input port to its output port.
In the Structure shown below, the Merge Module sends the value “3” to its output during initi-
alization.
Another special property of the Merge Module is that its ports determine the initialization order
of the Modules connected to them.
The rule is that the Modules are always initialized from top to bottom. So if you look at the
example Structure again with the Show Event Init Order option active, you will see this illus-
trated:
Even though the Merge Module will only let the Event from the bottommost input port through,
the initialization order can affect other parts of the Structure as well if the Modules lying up-
stream of the Merge Module have other connections as well.
A Quick Guide to Initialization
 
REAKTOR 6 - Building In Primary - 141


--- Page 142 ---

In the following structure, the Merge Module is highlighted and Show Event Init Order is ac-
tive.
It shows that everything connected to the top port of the Merge Module gets initialized first,
and then the Modules connected to the lower port are initialized.
For simple structures, this behavior should not cause any problems, but should issues arise
with the timing of Events during initialization, this is something to look out for.
A Quick Guide to Initialization
 
REAKTOR 6 - Building In Primary - 142

