--- Page 15 ---

1
Welcome to Building in Primary
 
Welcome to Building in Primary, a tutorial for building in REAKTOR’s Primary level. It de-
scribes the functions in REAKTOR that relate to building custom instruments, effects, or se-
quencers, enabling you to modify existing Ensembles or create your own.
This document assumes you are already familiar with the REAKTOR interface, as well as load-
ing and playing with Ensembles. At the least, you should have read the chapters in the REAK-
TOR 6 Diving Deeper document regarding navigation in the Structure View.
This document begins with an introduction to basic functions and concepts, followed with a
collection of tutorials. These tutorials introduce building concepts through common examples.
The final sections are guides to additional building features available in REAKTOR, as well as
some general tutorials for general building tasks (like skinning controls, and preparing Ensem-
bles for the KOMPLETE PLAYER Browser).
Welcome to Building in Primary
 
REAKTOR 6 - Building In Primary - 15


--- Page 16 ---

1.1
The REAKTOR 6 Documentation
 
The REAKTOR documentation is accessible from the Help menu
The documentation for REAKTOR 6 is divided into five separate documents, guiding you from
loading and playing pre-built Ensembles to building your own Instruments.
•
REAKTOR 6 What Is New is written for users who are already familiar with previous versions
of REAKTOR and only describes the latest features in brief.
•
REAKTOR 6 Getting Started is for new users. It is the only document needed for users who
intend to use REAKTOR for loading and playing pre-built REAKTOR instruments and ef-
fects.
•
REAKTOR 6 Diving Deeper expands on the concepts introduced in the Getting Started docu-
ment. It provides more detail on subjects like Snapshots (REAKTOR's preset system), and
introduces advanced topics like OSC control and combining multiple Instruments in one
Ensemble.
Welcome to Building in Primary
The REAKTOR 6 Documentation
 
REAKTOR 6 - Building In Primary - 16


--- Page 17 ---

•
REAKTOR 6 Building in Primary shows you how to build your own Instruments in REAK-
TOR’s Primary level. It focuses on a series of tutorials that guide you through building
your first synthesizers, effects, and sequencers.
•
REAKTOR 6 Building in Core describes the Core level of REAKTOR with its low-level build-
ing features, which can be used for implementing custom DSP algorithms. It includes ref-
erence information about the Core Macro Library, an comprehensive collection of DSP
building blocks.
With the exception of the What Is New document, each of the documents listed above builds
on the knowledge of the previous documents. While it is not necessary to read all of every
document, some of the more advanced documents, like Building in Primary, assume knowl-
edge from the previous documents.
 
Welcome to Building in Primary
The REAKTOR 6 Documentation
 
REAKTOR 6 - Building In Primary - 17


--- Page 18 ---

1.2
Manual Conventions
 
This section introduces you to the signage and text highlighting used in this manual.
•
Text appearing in (drop-down) menus (such as Open…, Save as… etc.) and paths to loca-
tions on your hard disk or other storage devices is printed in italics.
•
Text appearing elsewhere (labels of buttons, controls, text next to checkboxes etc.) is
printed in blue. Whenever you see this formatting applied, you will find the same text ap-
pearing somewhere on the screen.
•
Important names and concepts are printed in bold.
•
References to keys on your computer’s keyboard you’ll find put in square brackets (e.g.,
“Press [Shift] + [Enter]”).
1.
Single instructions are introduced by this play button type arrow.
⇨Results of actions are introduced by this smaller arrow.
An indented, gray paragraph contains additional, contextual information.
Furthermore, this manual uses particular formatting to point out special facts and to warn you
of potential issues. The icons introducing these notes let you see what kind of information is to
be expected:
The speech bubble icon indicates a useful tip that may often help you to solve a task
more efficiently.
The exclamation mark icon highlights important information that is essential for the giv-
en context.
The red cross icon warns you of serious issues and potential risks that require your full
attention.
Welcome to Building in Primary
Manual Conventions
 
REAKTOR 6 - Building In Primary - 18

