--- Page 107 ---

5
Building Practices and Conventions
 
5.1
Expression Computation
 
The simultaneity of event processing in REAKTOR Core makes the computation of single-argu-
ment mathematical expressions quite straightforward. One thing to keep in mind is that, as a
general rule, it is better to connect the constants to the Modulation Macros:
Computation of the x/(1+|x|) formula by a Core Macro.
The reason for using Modulation Macros is clearly illustrated by the following Structure:
A questionable implementation of the 1/x^2 formula.
Building Practices and Conventions
Expression Computation
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 107


--- Page 108 ---

The problem is that if there is no input event during the initialization, the constant at the up-
per input of the divider will trigger the computation. Since no event has ever arrived at the low-
er input of the divider, though, the value at this input is zero. Therefore a division by zero will
be performed, causing an INF value to be sent further downstream (see section ↑5.5, Denor-
mals and Other Bad Numbers for further details on why this should rather be avoided) Howev-
er, if it is certain that the initialization event will arrive at the lower input of the divider, the
above Structure can be used.
The computation of multiple argument expressions is fairly straightforward as well, except that
one needs to watch for potential initialization issues.
Computing x^2+y^2.
5.2
Generation of Audio and Other Regularly Clocked Events
 
The audio-generating Structures typically should be internally clocked by the SR.C:
Building Practices and Conventions
Generation of Audio and Other Regularly Clocked Events
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 108


--- Page 109 ---

A naïve (non-antialiased) sawtooth generator Macro.
The 1 wrap Macro used in the above Structure is found under Library > Math.
There is a general convention for the audio generating and processing Modules that they
should perform their 'sample tick' computations and send output events in and only in
response to the SR.C. The usage of the modulation adder in the above sawtooth oscilla-
tor ensures that no additional events (from the F input) will cause iteration triggering
and/or sending of an output event.
The same convention applies for CR-clocked processing and is a good candidate for the
application to other regularly clocked Structures.
Rather than binding the Macro to the usage of the SR bus available in the context, it might be
useful to allow an SR Bundle to be connected explicitly to a dedicated input of the Macro. A
useful pattern for this is illustrated in the following picture:
Building Practices and Conventions
Generation of Audio and Other Regularly Clocked Events
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 109


--- Page 110 ---

A Macro with a dedicated SR input port.
The Macro employs the Scoped Bus overriding technique to redefine the SR bus locally. If
there is no connection at the SR input of the Macro, the redefined bus will simply be connect-
ed to the SR bus from the Macro's parent context, so the Macro will work exactly in the same
way as if the SR bus was not redefined at all. However, if there is an explicit connection at the
SR input of the Macro, the Macro will use the explicitly connected SR Bundle instead.
An audio generating Structure might also need to perform some specific actions in response to
the SR.Reset. For a free-running oscillator, however, the Reset event can be completely ignored.
The above trick involving the local redefinition of the SR Scoped Bus will not work cor-
rectly inside a non-solid Macro, since the bus redefinition will also affect the outside
Structure. In this case the internal wiring of the SR.C, SR.R and SR.Reset needs to be
done using normal wires and/or QuickBuses.
5.3
Processing of Audio and Other Regularly Clocked Events
 
The processing of audio and other regularly clocked events is similar to the generation. Besides
the usage of Modulation Macros in places where the control signals are mixed with audio
events, it is a good idea to reclock the audio input with SR.C just in case that a non-audio sig-
nal is connected to the input from the outside (one particularly common case of this is leaving
an input disconnected, which implies a zero constant):
Building Practices and Conventions
Processing of Audio and Other Regularly Clocked Events
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 110


--- Page 111 ---

A naïve 1-pole lowpass filter.
Discrete-time difference LTI systems can be directly implemented in REAKTOR Core by simply
wiring up the system's block diagram using the z^-1 fbk and z^-1 ffd Macros for z-1 blocks, mod-
ulation multipliers for gains, and adders for summation points. The above picture provides an ex-
ample.
In the above Structure the Latch and the z^-1 fbk Macros serve as SR.C-clocked signal sour-
ces, which are then combined in various ways. The only other signal which is coming in (the
normalized cutoff control signal derived from the input "F") is connected via a Modulation Mac-
ro. This ensures that no other clocks or trigger sources can accidentally generate an output
event.
The same convention as for the audio generators is applied here: the output signal
events must be produced in and only in response to SR.C. The same convention applies
to CR.C and potentially to other regular clocks.
The SR.Reset fiber is automatically handled by the internal Structure of the z^-1 fbk Macro, so
that the filter's state is zeroed in response.
In the above filter Structure the processing of the cutoff control input "F" is not done by the
Modulation Macros. If the F signal is clocked by CR.C, the filter Structure might seem to vio-
late the above guidelines of processing the clock signals, however in fact this does not.
The clocking guidelines apply to entire Library or framework Macros, not to some parts
of their internal Structure.
Building Practices and Conventions
Processing of Audio and Other Regularly Clocked Events
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 111


--- Page 112 ---

Imagine a modulation multiplier had been used to combine F with the 6.28319/SR.R
value. Furthermore, imagine there was change of the sampling rate without a change of
the F input's value at the same time. In this case, the multiplier output would not have
been updated, which would have clearly been a bug.
As to whether one should have used a modulation divider to compute 6.28319/SR.R, this does
not matter since SR.R should be guaranteed to arrive during the initialization.
Had this guarantee not been in place, the divider could have produced an INF value at
the initialization, which would most likely result in a NaN value stuck in the filter feed-
back loop (see section ↑5.5, Denormals and Other Bad Numbers).
5.4
Rounding
 
There is only one type of rounding available in Core by default: rounding to the nearest integer.
The other rounding modes (rounding down, rounding up and rounding towards zero) are not
provided. There are a number of technical reasons behind this, related to the precision and ef-
ficiency of the generated code.
While in principle the other rounding modes could be implemented as Core Macros, often the
same Structures can be implemented just using the round-to-nearest mode, thereby not losing
the efficiency. For example, an interpolated read from a buffer in a classical implementation
rounds the non-integer position x down to an integer n and then performs a linear interpolation
between the values at n and n+1, where the interpolation weights are 1-(x-n) and x-n. Howev-
er, instead one could round (x-0.5) to the nearest integer. Since for values with a fractional
part of exactly 0.5 the round-to-nearest direction is not specified, sometimes, for an exact inte-
ger x, the value x-0.5 will be rounded to n=x-1 rather than n=x. However, for the interpolation
it does not matter, since the interpolation weights in this case will be 0 and 1 instead of 1 and
0, producing the same result.
One might need to ensure that the buffer has at least one 'extra sample' on each side of the re-
gion, which is read by the interpolator (this is usually a good idea regardless of the rounding mode
used, since there can be precision losses in the computations). These extra samples can be set to
an arbitrary value (within the same value range as the typical values in the buffer), since the in-
terpolation weights for the extra samples will be very close to zero.
Building Practices and Conventions
Rounding
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 112


--- Page 113 ---

In situations where a division result needs to be rounded down, usually an integer divi-
sion is meant semantically and this is what normally should be used as well. Note that
the integer division rounding mode is 'towards zero'.
The reason that the integer division rounding mode is 'towards zero' rather than 'down' is that this
is the mode supported by modern processors. Implementing a rounding down mode instead would
produce a higher CPU load. However, there is no difference between the two modes for non-nega-
tive integers.
The rounding down mode of the integer division seems to be generally more useful in
signal processing applications. Therefore, if future processors support this mode natively
in an efficient way, it is possible that Core integer division will also employ this mode.
While in this case Core will probably implement a legacy mode switch, it is recommend-
ed to stay away from relying on specific rounding direction when there are negative inte-
gers involved in the division.
5.5
Denormals and Other Bad Numbers
 
The IEEE floating point representation, which is typically used on modern computers, has sev-
eral different classes of special values, which are often processed at a much higher CPU time
cost. A single value of this sort occasionally popping up in the real-time data should not cause
noticeable harm. The problem is that quite often these values tend to stick in the state memo-
ry for quite long periods of time, if not forever (that is until the memory reinitialization).
Denormals
In 32 bit floating point, denormals are the values approximately in the absolute magnitude
range between 10-37 and 10-45. The values below this range cannot be represented in this for-
mat and are replaced by zeros.
For 64bit floating point the denormal range is approximately between 10-307 and 10-324 in magni-
tude.
Building Practices and Conventions
Denormals and Other Bad Numbers
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 113


--- Page 114 ---

One most critical situation where denormals can appear is exponentially decaying feedback
loops (such as feedback loops in the filters, feedback delays, reverbs, etc.). Denormals appear
when the signal level decays to 10-38 and stays there for a while until it drops below 10-45,
which, depending on the decay speed, can take quite a while.
Denormals are also generated in some other situations as well.
In order to mitigate the above problem, REAKTOR Core offers a DN Cancel Module whose pur-
pose is to kill the denormals. In the current implementation it is done by adding a small value
to the incoming signal.
•
If the incoming value is within a typical signal value range (approximately above 10-10),
then the addition of the denormal compensation value will not change the incoming value
at all, due to the limited precision of the floating point.
•
If the incoming value is lower (including the denormal range), it will be possibly modified,
but, due to the limited precision of the floating point, will also never produce a denormal
result.
Because the denormals are so likely to appear in feedback loops, the library z^-1 fbk
Macro includes a DN Cancel internally.
An additional side effect of the DN Cancel embedded into z^-1 fbk is that the z^-1 fbk acts as an
internal excitation source for the self-oscillating filters, like circuit noise in an analog filter. In ab-
sence of the DN Cancel such filters would not produce signals on their own without an external
excitation signal.
Denormals are rarely a problem in feedback loops that are not exponentially decaying.
For example, typical oscillator Structures include some kind of feedback loop, which is
implicitly formed between the Read and the Write Modules in the oscillator's phase in-
crement Structure. However, since this Structure is not exponentially decaying, but rath-
er produces a repeating ramp signal, the denormals are not a problem here.
Modern CPUs can often be configured in such way that denormals do not cause extra CPU load
(typically in this mode the CPUs simply flush them to zero). So, denormals have become less
of a problem in recent years. Nevertheless, it is probably reasonable to take measures against
them anyway because:
Building Practices and Conventions
Denormals and Other Bad Numbers
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 114


--- Page 115 ---

•
we do not know how the situation with handling of denormals by CPUs will develop in the
future.
•
at some point REAKTOR Core might support a different processor architecture, which
does have problems with denormals.
•
DN Cancel can serve as an internal excitation source for self-oscillating filters.
Infinities
Dividing a non-zero value by zero will produce an infinity (INF). INFs have a tendency to 'stick'
in the processing path for a long time, and they also have an increased risk of being converted
into a NaN.
NaNs
A NaN (not-a-number) is typically produced when some mathematical operation cannot deliver
a valid result. If combined with another value a NaN would normally produce another NaN,
which results in the tendency of NaNs to 'stick' in the processing paths, similarly to the INFs.
Initialization problems in filter Structures are one typical source of stuck NaNs, quite likely with
some infinities generated along the way.
There is no embedded way in REAKTOR Core to kill NaNs (or infinities). It is the respon-
sibility of the builder to prevent their appearance.
5.6
Optimization hints
 
5.6.1
Core Cell Handlers
 
When compiling a Core Cell, the compiler generates a number of different functions, or 'han-
dlers', which correspond to the Primary level internal Module API:
•
Initialization handler: This handler is invoked once at the very beginning of processing and
also upon a 'hard reset' of a Core Cell.
Building Practices and Conventions
Optimization hints
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 115


--- Page 116 ---

•
Event handlers: Each of the event-mode inputs of the Core Cell has a corresponding event
handler. The event handler unconditionally sends the event from the respective input into
the Core Cell's Structure.
•
Audio handler: This handler is invoked on each audio tick. The audio clock event is uncon-
ditionally sent from all respective sources inside the Core Cell.
Each of the handlers is compiled and optimized separately.
•
The compiler identifies the areas of the Structure which do not receive any events within
the particular handler and does not generate the respective code.
•
The compiler identifies the events which are being sent unconditionally within the partic-
ular handler (e.g. an audio clock within the audio handler) and does not generate any run-
time checks for these events.
•
For events that are sent conditionally the compiler generates the runtime checks, which
determine whether a particular event is being sent or not.
5.6.2
Latches and Modulation Macros
 
Often in Structure building there is a question of whether a Latch should be used at a particu-
lar position. In answering this question the logical function of the Latch and the associated
CPU consumption can be considered. As it was already mentioned, the compiler is treating
latches (and the 'read followed by a write' pattern in general) in a special optimized way. Thus,
the relationship between the usage of a Latch at a particular place and the associated change
in the CPU load is not straightforward.
•
Generally, if it is not necessary to store the value into the memory (because the value is
immediately read afterwards anyway), the compiler will not do so. In such situations a
Latch by itself will not add to the CPU load.
•
On the other hand, not placing a Latch on some signal path may result in a more compli-
cated triggering logic of the downstream Structure and thus in a higher CPU load pro-
duced not by the Latch itself, but by this downstream Structure.
Thus, there is no general rule whether using a Latch will increase the CPU load or decrease it.
It is best to simply use latches wherever logically appropriate.
As Modulation Macros are simply shortcuts for the mathematical operations combined with Latch-
es, the same applies to the Modulation Macros.
Building Practices and Conventions
Optimization hints
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 116


--- Page 117 ---

The already familiar naive 1-pole lowpass filter Structure illustrates:
A naïve 1-pole lowpass filter.
Depending on the clocking of the signal at the upper input there are the following two typical
situations:
•
If the input signal is already clocked at the audio rate, the latch at the input is fully trans-
parent and is not going to produce any compiled code.
•
If the input signal is not an audio rate signal, the latch will store its value upon the arrival
of the input event, the value being read back upon every audio clock.
The compiler will also handle a number of more complicated situations in regards to the input
signal clocking relative to the audio clock.
As for the cutoff control signal at the F input, the same situations are handled in the following
ways:
•
If the cutoff is an audio rate signal, the output of the first multiplier will be directly used
by the internal multiplier of the Modulation Macro during the audio clock processing.
•
If the cutoff is not an audio rate signal, the internal latch of the modulation multiplier will
store the value, and read it back upon the following audio clock tick.
On the other hand, the following Structure illustrates the case where a usual multiplier had
been used instead of the modulation multiplier:
Building Practices and Conventions
Optimization hints
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 117


--- Page 118 ---

A naïve 1-pole lowpass filter with a buggy use of a non-modulation multiplier.
In the above Structure the following problems would have arisen if a non-audio event arrives at
the F input.
•
The non-audio event at the F input will trigger the computation and the sending of the
new output value at an inappropriate (non-audio-clock) time moment.
•
The subtraction, which is normally done on the audio clock, will not be triggered during
this non-audio computation, since neither the z^-1 fbk Macro nor the input latch send an
event. However, the second multiplier and the adder will be triggered and the computa-
tion result will be stored in the z^-1 fbk Macro, overriding the previously stored state.
Thus, the filter will have performed a 'halfway update cycle', basically destroying its own
state.
•
The triggering conditions of the second multiplier and of the adder will be a mixture of
the audio clock and the cutoff event. If the audio clock is not the default clock (which is
unconditionally sent during the audio handler), but something else (e.g. downsampled or
gated audio clock), the mixture will require the compilation of a runtime check before the
second multiplier, causing a higher CPU load.
Thus a removal of the Latch from the Modulation Macro in the above 1-pole filter Structure
could have caused both incorrect functioning and a higher CPU load.
5.6.3
Routing and Merging
 
The compiler recognizes the following routing/merging patterns:
Building Practices and Conventions
Optimization hints
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 118


--- Page 119 ---

•
Two signal branches from a router are merged back afterwards. Such merging is treated
like an endpoint of the splitting:
•
A branch is being merged back to the pre-router signal. This is also a kind of endpoint of
the splitting:
Triggering-wise, most of the arithmetic Modules are equivalent to the Merge Modules and are also
subject to a similar recognition by the compiler.
The above patterns imply that no additional triggering events have been merged into the
branch (e.g. the branch is consistently employing Modulation Macros to mix in further signals).
The following Structure illustrates this:
Building Practices and Conventions
Optimization hints
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 119


--- Page 120 ---

An incorrect merging of two branches.
The Structure is supposed to add the lower input to the negative values of the upper input,
while the non-negative values should be left untouched. The Structure however neither works
as expected nor the mergepoint really merges the two signal branches back (triggering-wise).
•
If the events arrive simultaneously at both inputs of the Macro, the event at the lower in-
put will trigger the adder. The adder will use the latest negative value of the upper input
(which is available at the lower output of the router) as the other addend. The result of
the addition will be sent through the Merge Module to the Macro's output regardless of
the sign of the value at the upper input.
•
If an event arrives at the lower input only, the situation is similar. The adder will use the
latest negative value as the other addend and send it through the Merge to the output.
•
If an event arrives at the upper input only, the Structure works as expected. The value is
forwarded to the output untouched.
Regarding the triggering conditions of the output, rather than being identical to those of the
input, they are a complicated mixture of the triggering conditions of the first and the second
inputs and the sign of the value at the upper input. Thus, no splitting endpoint occurs trigger-
ing-wise.
Replacing the adder with a modulation adder will fix all of the above problems.
The above example and other kinds of merging do not correspond to the splitting end-
points, because the post-mergepoint triggering information is not identical to the pre-
router triggering information. Therefore there is additional CPU overhead at the merging
point due to the necessity of checking the runtime triggering condition for the subse-
quent signal path.
Building Practices and Conventions
Optimization hints
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 120


--- Page 121 ---

The compiler does not recognize identical or related conditions originating from different
BoolCtl sources. A merging of such signals will produce additional runtime overhead as any
merging of unrelated signals:
A merging of two formally unrelated signals.
Neither does the compiler identify 'always true' or 'always false' conditions from numerical
comparisons:
The compiler will not recognize that the event is always routed to the upper output.
Disconnected BoolCtl ports are recognized as providing constant control conditions.
Building Practices and Conventions
Optimization hints
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 121


--- Page 122 ---

ES Ctl
The BoolCtl signal produced by an ES Ctl Module is in the true state when there is an incom-
ing event at the ES Ctl Module's input at the very same,moment, and in the false state other-
wise. Thus, the ES Ctl Module allows you to check whether some event and the event at the
Router's input are arriving simultaneously.
The routing controlled by ES Ctl Modules is subject to further special optimization, where a
router can be found to be in an 'always true' or an 'always false' state. This is particularly de-
tected in the following cases:
•
The signal at the ES Ctl Module is the 'triggering parent' of the input signal of the Router.
•
The event at the ES Ctl Module is mutually exclusive with the event at the Router's input,
because it lies on a different branch of some other Router or because the event simply never
arrives within a particular handler.
This is illustrated by the following picture:
ES Ctl controlled by a 'parent' trigger.
Within the audio handler both the SR.C and the audio-mode Core Cell input (in the inputs area
on the left) are triggered unconditionally. Therefore the SR.C and the audio-mode input are
considered as the same (unconditional) clock source. So, within the audio handler, the audio
rate clock from the Core Cell's input is being sent through the first router. Thus, the input of
the second Router is some subset of the audio rate events and there is always an SR.C coming
to the ES Ctl simultaneously with the second Router's input events. Due to the 'parent-child'
relationship between these two events (one being obtained by routing the other), the compiler
is aware of this relationship and will deduce that the second Router can be always considered
to be in the true state.
Building Practices and Conventions
Optimization hints
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 122


--- Page 123 ---

Within the initialization handler the compiler will detect that the SR.C will never come at all
and will deduce that the second Router is always in the false state.
Actually, compared to the event and especially the audio handlers, it is not crucial to ensure that
the initialization handler is optimized, because the initialization handler is executed rarely. The
REAKTOR Core compiler also performs less optimization for the initialization handler, often for
the sake of being able to perform better optimization for the event and audio handlers.
Reclocking
At each mergepoint the compiler attempts to detect whether a splitting endpoint occurs. In
cases where 'chaotic routing' (when the routing branches are not merged back together, but
rather some signals with unrelated triggering sources are mixed) has been used in excessive
amounts, the analysis time can grow drastically. In the worst cases this can cause the compiler
to appear to 'hang indefinitely' (the compiler's progress bar stops completely).
NI is aware of this issue and is looking for a solution.
In a 'chaotic merging' situation practically each Module represents a new mergepoint with a
new set of triggering conditions. While the analysis of these triggering conditions consumes the
compilation time, the respective runtime check eventually generated by the compiler con-
sumes the runtime.
'Chaotic merging' by itself is not necessarily bad. The builder simply needs to be aware
of the associated CPU overhead. Such overhead can be completely acceptable e.g. in
processing of a rarely sent control events. The mentioned growth of the compilation
times is another problem requiring the builder's awareness.
To kill the problem of 'chaotic merging' at its very root the builder can do the following:
•
Use Modulation Macros at all logically appropriate places. The Modulation Macros copy
the triggering information from their triggering input (as long as they have only one trig-
gering input, which is true for the majority of such Macros), thus the signal stays within
the same routing/triggering branch.
Building Practices and Conventions
Optimization hints
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 123


--- Page 124 ---

•
Use control and audio clocks to make sure that the merged signals are either identically
clocked or at least clocked with a small number of different clocks. It is even better if the
clocks are derived from some common master clock in a hierarchical fashion, because
merging a 'subclock' to its 'parent' will simply produce the 'parent' clock again.
•
Use the technique of reclocking.
Reclocking means that the builder places Latches at a number of points within a 'chaotically
merging' structure. The Latches should be clocked by events with a relatively simple triggering.
Some candidates for such clocks are the following.
•
A control or an audio clock signal:
•
A control or an audio clock signal, put through a router, which is controlled by a Boolean
variable, where the latter is being set upon any arriving merged event and reset upon the
event passing through the Router:
Other strategies based on the specifics of given Structures can be used.
5.6.4
Numerical Operations
 
When computing mathematical expressions, various issues need to be taken into account.
Building Practices and Conventions
Optimization hints
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 124


--- Page 125 ---

Relative Cost
The relative CPU cost of various operations can vary from one processor to the other. However,
broadly speaking, the following hints can be kept in mind:
•
The cheapest operations are float/int addition, float/int subtraction, float multiplication.
Negation, absolute value and integer bitwise operations are equal or slightly more expen-
sive. DN Cancel in the current implementation is using an addition internally.
•
Float/int division and integer multiplication are noticeably more expensive.
•
Float exp and log Modules are the most expensive.
•
The cost of runtime condition checks (occurring in routing and non-split endpoint merg-
ing) can noticeably vary depending on the circumstances. At any rate they are probably
less desirable than a couple of cheap mathematical operations such as addition, so when-
ever possible, the latter might be preferred.
•
The Read and Write operations are comparable in cost to the cheapest mathematical op-
erations. They might be marginally more expensive for the arrays (this applies to the array
memory access, array indexing is more expensive).
•
Array indexing internally contains a safety clipping mechanism, which is essentially a run-
time check. So avoid sending unnecessary events to the array Index Module. Equally, con-
sider sharing an array Index Module between a Read and a Write in such situations.
Relative Order
Check the relative order of the expression computation and consider how often various input
events arrive. For example, the following Structure is taking into consideration that the sam-
pling rate changes much more rarely than the frequency control signal, therefore the division
will be done only upon sampling rate changes, otherwise only the much cheaper multiplication
will be performed:
Computation of the normalized frequency for an oscillator.
Building Practices and Conventions
Optimization hints
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 125


--- Page 126 ---

Had the above Structure been implemented just by dividing F by SR.R, the division would
have been performed on each F event, potentially causing a noticeable increase in the CPU
load.
Type Conversions
Conversions between floats and integer and between floats of different precisions are generally
comparable in cost to the cheapest mathematical operations, but this could drastically vary de-
pending on the platform (and used to in the past). Therefore, as a general rule, unnecessary
conversions should be avoided.
The following Structure for example does two unnecessary conversions between float and int:
Unnecessary implicit type conversion.
Even though this Structure should typically perform correctly (unless the integer values exceed
the range where the integers are exactly representable by floating point), the CPU load of the
Structure is higher than necessary due to the type conversions implicitly occurring on both
sides of the absolute value Module.
Avoid Bad Numbers
Various special types of values causing higher CPU load have been mentioned in section ↑5.5,
Denormals and Other Bad Numbers. These have to be avoided. Since these values can be par-
ticularly produced when mathematical operations are computed for the out-of-range inputs,
care needs to be taken to keep the values in the supported range.
Even if a particular out-of-range value does not result in a 'bad number' in a given im-
plementation of REAKTOR Core, this might change in the future versions or on different
hardware. The result of processing an out-of-range value should not be relied upon.
Building Practices and Conventions
Optimization hints
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 126

