--- Page 127 ---

6
Macro Reference
 
6.1
Low-level Macros
 
6.1.1
Math
 
The Macros for computing various mathematical operations, which are not implemented by the
built-in Modules: maximum, minimum, reciprocation, square root, rounding, wrapping etc. As
with math built-in Modules, each input is a triggering one.
Trig-Hyp
Trigonometric and hyperbolic functions and their inverses.
Shaper
Functions for control signal shaping.
BLT Prewarp
Frequency pre-warping for the bilinear transform (used in digital filter construction). Various
argument ranges and precisions.
6.1.2
Math Mod
 
Modulation Macros for computing various mathematical operations. See section ↑4.6, Modula-
tion Macros for the explanation of the modulation concept.
The 'tap' Macros are a special kind of Modulation Macros, where the triggering is done by the
'control' input rather than by the 'signal' inputs.
Shaper
Modulation versions of control signal shaper functions.
Macro Reference
Low-level Macros
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 127


--- Page 128 ---

6.1.3
Clipping
 
Modulation Macros for clipping the values to specified ranges. The clipping threshold inputs
are non-triggering.
6.1.4
Saturator
 
There are some 'hard saturators', which ensure that the output signal level does not exceed a
certain threshold and some 'soft saturators', which do not have a saturation threshold.
6.1.5
Convert
 
Dedicated mathematical Macros for conversion between different value scales (for example
pitch/frequency, gain/decibel etc.).
6.1.6
Memory
 
Scalar and array storage handling Macros. Latches, array read/write, z^-1.
6.1.7
Flow
 
Additional router Macros, which employ a threshold input instead of a BoolCtl one. The routing
is done depending on how the input signal compares to the threshold value.
6.1.8
Event
 
Macros specifically focusing on the processing of events (value + triggering). Filtering dupli-
cates, raw clock handling, delaying the events.
6.1.9
Logic
 
Boolean value handling. The Boolean values are represented by integer type signals.
Macro Reference
Low-level Macros
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 128


--- Page 129 ---

The built in BoolCtl signal type does not implement true signals in the same sense as scalar
types, because it does not transmit triggering information. A related issue is that they do not
support classical Boolean operations like AND and OR. If Boolean algebraic computations are
required, the Logic Macros can be used instead. Particularly they contain:
•
Comparison operations producing logical signals.
•
Classical Boolean AND, OR, NOT and XOR.
•
Dedicated float and integer signal routers controlled by a logical signal.
•
Conversion to and from BoolCtl.
6.2
Audio
 
The Library > Audio menu contains a number of low-level audio processing Macros (delays,
crossfaders, panners). Further audio processing Macros can be found in the submenus.
6.2.1
Oscillator
 
Classical analog waveforms
Classical analog waveform Macros.
The inputs are the following:
•
F: The oscillator frequency in Hz. Negative frequencies can be specified as well.
•
PW: The width of the pulse waveform.
◦0 means 0% width
◦1 means 100% width
◦0.5 means 50% width (default)
Macro Reference
Audio
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 129


--- Page 130 ---

•
Rst: Oscillator restart trigger. The value of the restart event specifies the restart phase:
◦0 restarts to the beginning of the cycle
◦1 restarts to the end of the cycle (which is the same as the beginning, since the wave-
form is fully periodic)
◦0.5 restarts to the middle of the cycle
◦0.3 restarts to the 30% of the cycle
◦Values different by a whole integer restart to the same position, for example 1.3 re-
starts to the 30% of the cycle
The classical analog waveform oscillators (as well as their slave versions) have a latency
of 1 sample. This may need to be taken into account if you need sample-precise control
of your structures.
The Rst input is intended for occasional oscillator restarts, for example in response to
the MIDI gate signal and should not be used to implement audio oscillator sync. For os-
cillator sync use the slave versions of the same oscillators.
The SR input is the standard SR Bundle connector explained in section ↑4.9, SR and CR Buses.
The upper output of the oscillators delivers the oscillator signal. The lower (Bundle) output is
for connection of the slave oscillators.
A special 4-Wave oscillator Macro delivers all four waveforms simultaneously. The waveforms
produced by this oscillator are phase locked to each other.
The 4-Wave oscillator.
Macro Reference
Audio
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 130


--- Page 131 ---

'Slave' Oscillators
The 'slave' oscillators are the audio-synced versions of the ordinary oscillators. Compared to the
ordinary oscillators, they have two additional inputs:
A 'slave' sawtooth oscillator.
•
Sync: Can be connected to the lower (Bundle) output of a master oscillator to produce the
audio sync effect. Only ordinary (non-slave) oscillators can serve as master oscillators.
•
SncH: Controls the sync hardness:
◦1 = hard sync
◦0 = no sync
◦0 to 1 = various degrees of soft-sync
Sub Oscillator
The sub oscillator is a special kind of 'slave' pulse oscillator, which is phase-locked to the mas-
ter.
Sub oscillator.
The idea of the sub oscillator is that it changes its output from -1 to 1 or back whenever there
is a transition (a cycle completion) in the master, thereby producing a square waveform one
octave below the master oscillator's frequency. By leaving out some of the master transitions
out, further sub oscillator modes are available:
•
0 = -1 octave, 50% pulse width (use every master transition)
•
1 = -2 octaves, 50% pulse width (use every other master transition)
Macro Reference
Audio
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 131


--- Page 132 ---

•
2 = -2 octaves, 75% pulse width (use 1st, 4th, 5th, 8th etc. master transitions)
The sub oscillator is fully driven by the master oscillator. Therefore it stops whenever the mas-
ter is stopped.
Sync Gate
The Sync Gate Macro allows to interrupt the sync signal from the master to a slave or a sub
oscillator.
Using a sync gate to stop the audio sync.
The signal at the G input should be either 0 or 1. In the 0 state the sync signal does not come
through, effectively disabling the synchronization of the slave to the master.
A sub oscillator would be completely stopped if the gate is off.
Noise Oscillators
These generate different kinds of noise.
Noise oscillators.
If several identical noise oscillators are used, then by default they will produce fully identical
signals. This can be avoided by connecting different constants to their Seed inputs, which then
initializes their internal (pseudo) random number generators with different values.
Macro Reference
Audio
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 132


--- Page 133 ---

6.2.2
Filter
 
The Core Macro Library contains a selection of ZDF filters. The filters are built using the ZDF
toolkit, which is also part of the Library (see section ↑6.4.3, ZDF Toolkit).
The filters built using the ZDF toolkit are optimized for Structure readability, not for CPU efficien-
cy. A number of filters have been redone with CPU efficiency in mind. These can be told by the
"(opt)" suffix (standing for optimized) at the end of their names.
Linear Filters
Linear filters only change the frequency spectrum of the signal and do not introduce any dis-
tortion. A number of these filters can resonate but cannot self-oscillate (at least not reliably).
The maximum resonance setting of these filters, where applicable, is therefore limited to (ap-
proximately) 1.
The most important Macros implementing the linear filters are the following.
•
1-pole > 1-pole: A multimode linear 1-pole filter producing a low-pass and a high-pass
signals with a -6dB/octave roll-off.
•
2-pole > SVF: A multimode 2-pole resonating filter producing a low-pass, a band-pass and
a high-pass output. The roll-off of low-pass and high-pass is -12dB/octave. The roll-off of
the band-pass is -6dB/octave on each of the two slopes. Modal pickups (see below) can
be used to obtain further modes.
Macro Reference
Audio
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 133


--- Page 134 ---

Intuitively, although not fully correctly, one could imagine each of the filter's poles to be
responsible for a -6dB/octave roll-off: one pole is responsible for the -6dB/octave slope
to the left of the filter's center frequency, and the other pole is responsible for the -6dB/
octave slope to the right of the filter's center frequency.
•
4-pole > Ladder LP: A 4-pole resonating low-pass filter, emulating the classical transistor
ladder filter design. The roll-off is -24dB/octave. At higher resonance settings this filter
naturally produces a drop in the bass frequencies. This drop can be avoided by using the
modal pickups (see below).
•
4-pole > Ladder HP: A 4-pole resonating high-pass filter. The roll-off is -24dB/octave. The
Ladder LP modal pickups (see below) can be used with Ladder HP, producing 'flipped' fil-
ter shapes (high-pass instead of low-pass etc.).
•
4-pole > Ladder BP: A 4-pole resonating band-pass filter. The roll-off of each of the two
slopes is -12dB/octave. The filter does not provide the modal pickup connector, but two
further modes with lower pole counts (BP3 and BP2) are provided directly by the Module
outputs. At zero resonance the BP3 mode has a -12dB low-pass roll-off and -6dB high-
pass roll-off, while BP2 has both roll-offs at -6dB/octave
The F input specifies the filter cutoff frequency in Hz.
Macro Reference
Audio
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 134


--- Page 135 ---

The Res input, if available, controls the filter's resonance. The range is from 0 to approximate-
ly 1. In fact, the maximum resonance value is clipped slightly below 1, because at too high
resonance settings linear filters may produce very loud resonance peaks. For higher resonance
settings use nonlinear filters (see below).
The resonance control of the filter Macros is implemented by linear mapping of the resonance pa-
rameter to the filter's internal parameters (such as feedback amount or damping). This does not
necessarily provide the best resonance control curves. Use control signal shapers (such as those
found in Math Mod > Shapers) to change the resonance control curve. For example, an SVF reso-
nance control knob can be shaped with a Hyp Shaper whose bending parameter is set to 0.3. This
will make the resonance control of the SVF LP feel similar to the one of the Ladder LP.
Nonlinear Filters
Nonlinear filters, besides the purely filtering effect, apply some nonlinear processing to the sig-
nal, causing it to saturate internally in the filter. As a result, the resonance of such filters can
be driven to excessive values (above 1) without causing the filter to 'explode'. At these exces-
sive resonance settings the filters may produce sound even in the absence of the input signal,
which is referred to as the self-oscillation effect.
The most important nonlinear filters in the Core Macro Library are the following.
•
2-pole > SKF LP (NL): Nonlinear Sallen–Key low-pass filter (with an additional band-pass
output). In the linear range (low signal levels) this filter sounds identically to the SVF and
therefore can be thought of as a nonlinear counterpart of the latter. The SatL input con-
trols the internal saturation level of the filter. The smaller is the saturation level setting,
the stronger the filter will saturate (default value is 1).
For a larger variety of output signals use nonlinear TSK filters, which have dedicated pickup Mac-
ros. The Core Macro Library also contains a nonlinear SVF, but SKF and TSK are the recommend-
ed option for nonlinear filters.
Macro Reference
Audio
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 135


--- Page 136 ---

•
4-pole > Ladder LP (NL): A nonlinear counterpart of Ladder LP. The SatL input controls
the internal saturation level of the filter. The smaller is the saturation level setting, the
stronger the filter will saturate (default value is 1). The F HP and HP A inputs control the
cutoff (in Hz) and the amount (from 0 to 1) of the internal high-pass filtering of the feed-
back signal. One particular effect of this high-pass filtering is prevention of the loss of
bass frequencies. When used together with normalized DC gain pickups (such as Lad-
der LP -> LPn), it can produce an extra bass boost.
The Core Macro Library also contains 8-pole nonlinear ladder filters. The 8-pole band-pass ladder
filter stands out among those by having two resonance peaks in the negative resonance self-oscil-
lation range, which can generate quite special sounds.
In order to better balance the behavior of the saturating nonlinear filters in the low-resonance
and self-oscillation it is recommended to connect an additional saturator (see section ↑6.1.4,
Saturator) at the filter's output.
Modal Pickups
With many filter designs (including Ladder, SVF and TSK) a large number of different modes
can be picked up from the filter. In order to keep the number of outputs low, many filter Mac-
ros in the Core Macro Library provide only the main mode (or a small number of 'main modes')
directly as their outputs. The remaining modes can be picked up from the dedicated modal
Bundle output:
Modal Bundle outputs of SVF and Ladder LP filters.
Macro Reference
Audio
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 136


--- Page 137 ---

The pickup can be done by using the modal pickup Macros, located in the Pickup submenus
of the respective menus. For example, modal pickups for the 2-pole filters are located in Audio
> Filter > 2-pole > Pickups. The pickup Macros are categorized as follows.
•
SVF pickups: Can be used with linear and nonlinear 2-pole SVF filters.
•
TSK LP pickups: Can be used with linear and nonlinear TSK LP filters.
•
Ladder LP pickups: Can be used with linear and nonlinear Ladder LP filters. The same
pickups can also be 'abused' with the Ladder HP filter, producing 'flipped' modes (for ex-
ample HP modes instead of LP modes etc.).
A modal pickup picking up a normalized-DC-gain low-pass mode of a Ladder LP.
There is a special XX pickup category. These pickups do not pick up a specific mode, but rath-
er allow dynamic control over which specific mode is being picked up. The control is per-
formed via a selector input. The specific meanings of the selector values can be taken from the
information of the respective pickup Macros.
Dynamic modal pickup.
The upper output of such dynamic pickup Macros provides the picked up modal signal.
The lower Bundle output of "XX" pickups provides the modal mixing coefficients for the selected
mode. These coefficients can be particularly used by the TF modal pickup Macros from the
TF Toolkit (see section ↑6.4.4, TF toolkit).
Multinotch
Contains multi-notches with a low notch count and a comb filter.
Macro Reference
Audio
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 137


--- Page 138 ---

Butterworth
Butterworth filters are a classical signal processing filter type. By design, they are intended to
statically cut a frequency band from a signal, therefore they do not have any resonance setting.
Nevertheless, their parameters can be modulated, as with the other filters in the Core Macro
Library.
The Butterworth 2 filter group contains the 2nd kind (resonating) Butterworth filters as described
in The Art of VA Filter Design by Vadim Zavalishin.
Shelving
Each of the shelving filters simultaneously produces three different responses at the respective
three outputs: low-shelving, high-shelving and tilting (simultaneously low- and high-shelving in
opposite directions and at half amounts). Due to technical reasons the high-shelving output
has inverted control of the gain (for example if Gain input is set to +12, the high frequencies
will be lowered by 12dB). As a convenience means for controlling the high-shelving gain, there
is an inverting Gain input.
An 8-pole shelving filter.
Shelving filters have an additional Slope input which controls the slope steepness. The range
is 0 to 3 for the 8-pole shelving filter. Shelving filters with lower pole counts cover a smaller
range of Slope value, the maximum supported slope setting being 2 for 4-pole, 1 for 2-pole
and 0 (therefore there is no slope input) for the 1-pole.
The shelving group also contains band-shelving filters, which also have three outputs: band-
shelving, “notch”-shelving and band-tilting. The most important output is the band-shelving
one, the other two are provided mostly for completeness, as an analogy to the low-shelving/
high-shelving/tilting outputs. The “notch” shelving is an “inverted” version of the band-shelv-
ing (the variable-gain shelves are on the left and on the right of the center band) and is con-
trolled by an inverted gain signal. The band-tilting is a combination of band- and notch-shelv-
Macro Reference
Audio
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 138


--- Page 139 ---

ing done in opposite directions at half amounts. The BW input controls the shelving bandwidth
in octaves. The range of the Slope parameter for band-shelving filters is 0 to 2 for the 8-pole,
0 to 1 for the 4-pole and 0 to 0 (no Slope input) for the 2-pole.
Crossovers
The crossover Macros come in groups of four to be used together. In the simple case you will
need only two of the respective Macros. For example, in the picture below a signal is being
split into three bands by a 4th-order Linkwitz-Riley crossover. The original signal and the three
bands are processed by four independent processors and then are merged together, where you
need to use a special dedicated Macro for merging (there is a different Macro for each kind of
crossover). The reason you need this Macro is that there are phase differences between the sig-
nals and they need to be phase corrected before the merging.
A usage example of a 3-band crossover with band thresholds at 100Hz and 5kHz
If you don’t need to merge the original signal back, a somewhat less CPU-intensive Macro can
be used instead:
A cheaper mixer for the 3-band crossover.
On the other hand, if you merge the original signal later, you need to use a separate Macro for
the phase compensation:
Macro Reference
Audio
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 139


--- Page 140 ---

Phase correction of the unsplit signal.
6.2.3
FX
 
A selection of various effects.
Modulation Effects
The modulation effects include phaser, flanger, chorus, tremolo and autopan. Except for auto-
pan, there are mono and stereo versions of these effects. Most of their control parameters are
identical or similar.
The phaser Macros are discussed below as typical examples. Further details about the effect
parameters which are different from those of the phasers can be found in the information of
the respective Macros.
Stereo and mono versions of 2-notch phaser.
The following inputs are available:
Macro Reference
Audio
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 140


--- Page 141 ---

•
L, R (stereo) or the top nameless input (mono): Input signal.
•
Rate: The rate of internal LFO in Hz.
•
P1, P2: The boundary pitches of the modulation range. The center cutoff frequency of the
internal multinotch filter is modulated within this pitch range.
•
Fbk: Feedback amount. Range -1 to 1. The feedback setting affects the width of the
notches, positive values making the notches wider, negative values making them smaller.
•
Spread: Adjust the spreading of the notches. Negative values increase the notch density,
positive values spread them wider apart.
•
Inv: The notch inversion mode switch. Swaps the positions of the peaks and the notches.
0 = off, 1 = on.
•
LFO Bend (effects with exponential LFO): Controls the bending of the exponential LFO
segments. 0 = linear, +1/-1 = rectangular jumps.
•
LFO Shape (effects with triangle-sine morphing LFO): Controls the morphing amount from
the triangle LFO shape to the sine LFO shape.
•
Dry/Full: Controls the mixing amount of the dry and wet signals. 0 = dry signal only, 1 =
'strongest sounding' mixture of dry and wet signals.
The following outputs are available:
•
L, R (stereo) or the top nameless output (mono): Output signal.
•
Wet L, Wet R (stereo) or Wet (mono): Pure wet signal. To be used with the 'send' style of
effect usage, when several sounds are sent to the same effect with different 'send'
amounts, producing a common 'wet' signal which is then returned back to the entire mix.
Delay Effects
The delay effects are using audio delays to produce echo sounds. A stereo feedback delay Mac-
ro illustrates:
Macro Reference
Audio
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 141


--- Page 142 ---

Stereo feedback delay.
The following inputs are available:
•
L, R: Signal inputs.
•
InPan: Controls stereo balance of the input signal. Range -1..1.
•
Time: Specifies the delay time in seconds. Maximum delay time at 192 kHz sampling
rate is 1 sec. At lower sampling rates the maximum time is larger. It can be further in-
creased by modifying the delay buffers inside the Macro:
•
Fbk: Feedback amount. Range -1..1.
Macro Reference
Audio
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 142


--- Page 143 ---

•
XFbk: Cross-channel (left/right) feedback amount. Range -1..1.
•
Post: The 'post-feedback-gain' output mode. If this input is set to 1, the output signal is
picked up after the feedback gain has been applied (if the feedback setting is zero, there
will be no wet output signal in this mode).
•
Dry: Amount of dry signal to be sent to the outputs
•
Wet: Amount of wet signal to be sent to the outputs.
The following outputs are available:
•
L, R: Output signal.
6.2.4
Transfer Functions
 
A set of Macros for computing the transfer functions (more precisely, frequency responses) of
the filters is located under Library > Audio > Filters > Tranfer Func. These are the counterparts
to the respective filters. They follow one and the same set of conventions. The SVF transfer
function Macro illustrates:
An SVF [TF] Macro.
The inputs and the outputs of a TF Macro are roughly identical to those of the respective filter
Macro with some differences.
•
The upper input of a TF Macro receives a signal frequency value in Hz instead of the au-
dio signal. The Macro will output the value of the filter's frequency response at this fre-
quency.
In order to build a graphical display of filter's amplitude or phase response, send an iterated
range of signal frequency values to this input and pick up the respective output values.
•
Other inputs of a TF Macro receive the parameter values identical to those of the respec-
tive filter Macro.
Macro Reference
Audio
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 143


--- Page 144 ---

•
The 'audio signal' outputs of the TF Macro (those corresponding to the audio signal out-
puts of the filter) produce the frequency response value at the frequency specified by the
upper input. These are complex values which can be converted into the amplitude and
phase response parts by using the to Polar Macro from the TF toolkit (see section ↑6.4.4,
TF toolkit):
•
The bottom 'modal Bundle' output contains a Bundle of modal TF values, which can be
picked up by a dedicated TF pickup Macro. Except for the all-pass mode, the modal SVF
frequency response pickup is done by using the SVF [TF] to XX Macro. The SVF [TF] to XX
Macro does not have an integer modal selector input, in place of it is expecting a modal
coefficients Bundle from the SVF to XX selector:
The SVF to XX Macro in the above picture does not need to be connected to an audio filter:
Macro Reference
Audio
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 144


--- Page 145 ---

The TF Macros compute the ideal analog frequency responses, not taking into account
the discrete-time warping of the frequency axis.
Some of audio filters do not have TF counterparts. However, often there is a TF counterpart,
which is not immediately obvious. Below are some examples.
•
There are no dedicated TF Macros for nonlinear filters (since frequency responses in un-
stable range do not really make sense anyway). Use the corresponding linear TF Macros.
•
The frequency response of TSK filters is identical to those of SVF, so simply use an
SVF TF Macro to obtain TSK frequency response.
•
The Ladder LP [TF] Macro has the F HP and HP A inputs available only for the Lad-
der LP (NL) Macro. To obtain the frequency response of a low-pass ladder filter without a
high-pass in the feedback these inputs can be simply left disconnected.
6.3
Control
 
6.3.1
Envelope
 
A small selection of prebuilt envelopes of varying complexity. If the selection is not sufficient,
the existing envelopes can be easily extended by the builder, because they are built using the
Envelope toolkit (see section ↑6.4.2, Envelope Toolkit).
The envelopes follow one and the same set of conventions. The AHDSR (attack-hold-decay-
sustain-release) envelope is used here as an example to illustrate these conventions:
Macro Reference
Control
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 145


--- Page 146 ---

AHDSR envelope.
The envelope inputs are the following.
•
G: Should be connected to a gate Bundle (see below for the explanation of Core's gate
Bundle conventions). It is responsible for triggering the attack (upon the 'gate on' event)
and release (upon the 'gate off') modes of the envelope and for sending the keypress ve-
locity information, if any.
•
A, H, D, S, R: The 'main' control parameters. A, H, D and R specify the time constants for
the attack, hold, decay and release stages. S specifies the sustain level, which normally
should be in the range 0 to 1, since the attack peak level is always 1.
•
BendA, BendD, BendR: The bending of the attack, decay, and release stage curves. The
bending applies only to the finite-time curves (see the finite-time mode explanation be-
low). The Bend parameter range is -10 to 10. Zero bending produces linear curves, nega-
tive bending produces 'slowing down' curves, positive bending produces 'speeding up
curves'. The following pictures illustrate the attack and decay shapes for zero, negative
and positive bends respectively:
Macro Reference
Control
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 146


--- Page 147 ---

•
FinD, FinR: The finite-time mode of the decay and release stages. When the mode is set
to 1 (finite), the respective stage has the duration as specified by the D or R input. When
the mode is set to 0 (infinite), the respective stage decays infinitely to its target value
(sustain level or zero).
•
Rst0: The zero-reset mode of the envelope. When set to 1 the attack always starts from
zero level. When set to 0 the attack starts from the current level of the envelope.
•
VelS: Velocity sensitivity, the range is 0 to 1. If set to 0, the envelope ignores the velocity
information in the gate Bundle completely. If set to 1, the envelope scales its level ac-
cording to the velocity (provided the velocity information is present in the Bundle, see the
discussion of the gate Bundle below). At intermediate settings the envelope partially
scales its level according to the velocity.
The CR input is the standard CR Bundle connector explained in section ↑4.9, SR and CR Buses.
Gate Bundle
The envelope gate connections are employing a special gate Bundle. The Bundle internally
transmits the information about the gate on/off events and the associated velocities.
The gate Bundle can be obtained by converting from a Primary level gate event (forwarded to
Core via an event-mode Core Cell port). The conversion is implemented by the Gate from Prim
Macro (Library > Control > Envelope > Gate > Gate from Prim) and includes the gate on/off
events and the 'on' velocity (no 'off' velocity):
AR envelope controlled by a Primary gate event signal.
The XZero to Gate Macro (Library > Control > Envelope > Gate > XZero to Gate) sends gate
events in response to positive and negative zero crossings of the input signal (positive zero
crossings produce 'gate on' events, negative zero crossings produce 'gate off' events):
Macro Reference
Control
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 147


--- Page 148 ---

AR envelope controlled by zero crossings of the incoming audio signal.
Internally the gate Bundle consists up to four fibers:
A Bundle Pack for all four fibers of the gate Bundle.
The conventions for the gate Bundle are the following.
•
On: Transmits the 'gate on' trigger. The consumers should ignore the value of this fiber.
The producers should always send zero values on this fiber.
•
Off: Optional fiber. Transmits the 'gate off' trigger. The consumers should ignore the value
of this fiber. The producers should always send zero values on this fiber. If this fiber is
absent, it means that the 'gate off' trigger events are never sent.
•
On Vel: Optional fiber. If present, specifies the current 'on velocity'. The standard range is
positive numbers less than or equal to 1, however, larger values are allowed as well. Gen-
erally speaking, this value should be sent only simultaneously with 'gate on' events (or
sent during the initialization, if the value is constant). If an 'on velocity' event comes at
any other moment, the consumers may respond to it or ignore it until the next 'gate on'.
Velocity-sensitive consumers should treat the missing "On Vel" filber as a value of 1.
•
Off Vel: Optional fiber. If present, specifies the current 'off velocity'. The convention is the
same as for the 'on velocity', except that the 'off velocity' events should be sent together
with the 'gate off' events.
Macro Reference
Control
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 148


--- Page 149 ---

A number of preconfigured Bundle Pack and Unpack Modules with different numbers of fiber def-
initions/pickups are available under Library > Control > Envelope > Gate.
The Add Gate Defaults Macro (Library > Control > Envelope > Gate > Add Gate Defaults)
automatically adds Off, On Vel and Off Vel to the Bundle, in case these fibers are miss-
ing (the added velocities are equal to 1). It is intended to be used in implementations of
gate Bundle consumers and other Structures.
When constructing a gate Bundle, never leave the triggering fibers On and Off discon-
nected. Disconnected fibers imply a zero constant, which will send a trigger event upon
initialization. Simply leave the optional fiber away from the Bundle, or connect it to a
No Event Macro if you do not want any events sent.
6.3.2
LFO
 
A number of LFOs of classical shapes. These are intended to be used as modulation sources,
not as audio signal sources. Particularly, the LFO Macros do not contain any anti-aliasing.
Various LFOs available in the Core Macro Library.
The inputs are similar to those of the oscillators (see section ↑6.2.1, Oscillator).
The CR input is the standard CR Bundle connector explained in section ↑4.9, SR and CR Buses.
The MultiWave LFO provides the same waveforms (except the parabolic one) phase-locked to
each other.
Macro Reference
Control
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 149


--- Page 150 ---

MultiWave LFO.
The Tri/Sin LFO can be smoothly morphed between the triangular and sinusoidal shapes. The
T/S input controls the morphing (0 = triangle, 1 = sine, other values in between specify inter-
mediate shapes).
Tri/Sin LFO.
The Exp LFO is generating analog-like slowing down exponential curves. The slowdown amount
varies from a purely linear segment to a discontinuous jump, thereby morphing between trian-
gular and rectangular shapes at the zero and maximum settings. Instead of slowing down
shapes, the speeding up shapes can also be generated. The Bend parameter controls the seg-
ment shape (0 = linear, 0..-1 = slowdown, -1 = rectangular, 0..1 = speedup, 1 = rectangular).
The PW parameter controls the 'pulse width'.
Exp LFO.
The Random LFO is delivering the signal which would be produced by a white-noise driven
S&H. The Seed parameter is similar to the one of the noise oscillators (see section ↑6.2.1, Os-
cillator).
Macro Reference
Control
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 150


--- Page 151 ---

Random LFO.
The triangle, sine and parabolic LFO shapes are also delivered in stereo versions. Compared to
mono versions, these have an additional Offs input, which controls the offset between the left-
and the right-channel phase-locked LFO shapes. At zero Offs both left and right channel sig-
nals are identical. For Offs between 0 and 0.5 the left channel LFO is 'preceding' the right
channel one ('movement from left to right'). For Offs between 0 and -0.5 the right channel is
'preceding' the left one ('movement from right to left'). At ±0.5 the channels have opposite
phases (both +0.5 and -0.5 settings have identical effect). The Offs value can exceed the ±0.5
range, so that at ±1 the channels are again in sync and so on.
Stereo LFOs.
Tempo and transport position syncing
The Multiwave LFO Sync Macro is capable of syncing to the tempo and/or transport position:
Tempo- and transport-syncable LFO
Macro Reference
Control
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 151


--- Page 152 ---

The Mode input controls the syncing where you can independently enable tempo and transport
position syncing (see the Macro’s info for the details).
If tempo syncing is enabled, instead of the F input specifying the LFO rate in Hz, the Div input
is used, specifying the division of the whole note. For example, Div=8 sets the duration of one
LFO cycle equal to the duration of an 8th note.
If transport position syncing is enabled, the LFO doesn’t freely run but strictly follows the song
position. This guarantees that the LFO will always have one and the same value at each given
song position, therefore LFO works exactly the same each time, like an automation curve. If
the transport is stopped, the LFO can continue to run freely or stop, like an automation curve
would do (this choice is also separately controlled by the Mode parameter).
Note that in the transport position-synced mode the LFO’s value may jump on a loop
boundary or if song position is changed manually.
The tempo and transport position syncing require the transport information to be available.
This can be achieved by using the Prim Transport Macro (Library > Control > LFO > Helpers >
Prim Transport) which defines a number of scoped buses based on primary level signals.
Prim Transport Macro providing the transport information.
The input signals for the Prim Transport Macro need to be obtained from the respective pri-
mary modules.
Obtaining signals for the Prim Transport Macro.
If you need only tempo- or only transport position-syncing, you need to provide only the respec-
tive signals to the Prim Transport Macro.
Macro Reference
Control
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 152


--- Page 153 ---

Obtaining only the tempo information.
Other tempo and transport position synced LFOs (for example the ones with only tempo
or only transport position syncing, or providing only one output waveform) can be built,
by stripping down and/or modifying the internals of the Multiwave LFO Sync Macro. For
doing such modifications using the LFO toolkit Macros is recommended.
6.3.3
Smoother
 
Please refer to section ↑4.9.4, CR rate change for the details of using smoothers.
6.4
Toolkits
 
6.4.1
LFO Toolkit
 
The LFO toolkit consists of two parts: Helpers (Library > Control > LFO > Helpers) and Phase
Shapers (Library > Control > LFO > Phase Shapers). The Helpers part concerns itself with gen-
eration of the LFO phase signals. The Phase Shapers part contains Macros for converting the
phase signal into LFO waveforms.
As a simple example of the usage of the toolkit Macros consider the internal structure of the
Sine LFO Macro from the Core Macro Library:
Here the phase driver is directly connected to the shaper, the later converting the phase signal
to the sine waveform.
Macro Reference
Control
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 153


--- Page 154 ---

The Sine LFO Stereo Macro additionally uses two phase offset helper Macro to shift the left
and right channels symmetrically in the opposite directions:
To build LFOs with tempo and/or transport position syncing features it is easiest to use the
Phase Drv Sync helper Macro (which is the core of the MulltiWave LFO Sync Macro). Lower-
level helpers such as Position Sync and Div to F Macros can also be used.
6.4.2
Envelope Toolkit
 
The envelope toolkit (Library > Control > Envelope > Toolkit) contains the building blocks of
the envelopes in the Core Macro Library. In fact there are only two Macros (Stage and Process)
in the toolkit and each envelope is built using these two Macros, where the Process Macro is
used exactly once in each given envelope. Therefore in order to build a custom envelope one
could simply start off with the existing envelope and duplicate the Stage Macro within that en-
velope as necessary.
In fact this duplication approach should be even preferred, because due to the development of
the Core Macro Library, different versions of the Stage and Process Macros may become incom-
patible with each other.
The implementation of the ADSR envelope found in the Core Macro Library illustrates this:
Macro Reference
Toolkits
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 154


--- Page 155 ---

The internal Structure of an ADSR envelope.
The A, D and R Macros are simply the renamed copies of the Stage Macro. There is no dedi-
cated Macro for the sustain stage, because in this envelope the decay stage is infinitely decay-
ing. Thus there is really no sustain stage, only the sustain level as the target level of the decay
stage.
The Process Macro on the right is the one which generates the real envelope signal, the Stage
Macros only being responsible for setting the stage parameters. The upper input of the Process
Macro specifies the speed coefficient for the envelope. This can be useful if the envelope tool-
kit is used to build an LFO, otherwise this coefficient should be set to 1, so that the stage du-
rations are exactly as specified by the respective stage's parameters.
The three parallel connection paths at the bottom are used to connect the stages together in
their natural order. The Process Macro must be at the end of the chain. For the first stage
Macro these three inputs must be left disconnected, except for the lowest of them. This should
be connected to a 64-bit precision float array. The number of elements of the array must be
equal (or at least equal) to the number of the stage Macros times 6.
The other inputs of the stage Macros are as follows.
Macro Reference
Toolkits
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 155


--- Page 156 ---

•
!: This is the explicit triggering input of the stage. An event at this input will force the
envelope to immediately jump to this stage. Notice that the 'Gate On' event is connected
to the triggering input of the attack stage, while the 'Gate Off' event is connected to the
triggering input of the release stage.
•
Mode: A bitwise OR of stage modal flags:
◦1 = jump mode. If specified, this flag causes the stage to start (when explicitly trig-
gered or automatically switched to) at the level specified by the Y0 input. Otherwise
the stage starts at the current output level of the envelope (no jump).
◦2 = infinite mode. If specified, this flag causes the stage to infinitely decay from the
starting level (according to the jump mode and Y0 settings) to the end level specified
by Y1. The infinite decay is exponential, the decay characteristic time being control-
led by the T input.
◦4 = constant mode. If specified, this flag causes the stage to stay at its starting level
(according to the jump mode and Y0 settings) infinitely. The segment end level speci-
fied by Y1 and duration specified by T are ignored.
•
Y0: The starting level of the stage. Used only if the jump mode is specified.
•
Y1: The end level of the stage. Used unless the constant mode is specified.
•
T: The segment duration in seconds. In the infinite mode this input specifies the seg-
ment's characteristic time. In the constant mode this input is ignored.
•
Bend: The exponential bending of the segment. Does not apply to infinite or constant seg-
ments. Refer to section ↑6.3.1, Envelope for more details about this parameter.
•
Next: The zero-based index of the 'next' segment (the segment which should be switched
to after this segment runs out). If disconnected, assumes the 'natural' next segment, ac-
cording to the order of connection of the stage Macros.
The parameters can be modulated in real-time. Particularly the modulation of Y1, T and
Bend parameters of the currently running segment will cause real-time changes of the
envelope behavior.
Macro Reference
Toolkits
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 156


--- Page 157 ---

6.4.3
ZDF Toolkit
 
The ZDF toolkit (Library > Audio > Filters > ZDF Toolkit) contains the building blocks of the
filters in the Core Macro Library. The purpose of the toolkit is to allow the implementation of
ZDF (zero delay feedback) filters in an intuitively readable manner.
The following building blocks correspond to the fundamental elements of the continuous-time
('analog') filter block diagrams:
ZDF toolkit Macros implementing the fundamental continuous time audio processing primitives.
•
Integrator: A fundamental 'analog memory element'. Roughly corresponds to the z-1 blocks
in the digital filter block diagrams, but is not functionally equivalent to the latter. The w/2
input should be connected to the pre-warped half-cutoff value
•
Adder: Adds to ZDF signals together.
•
Gain: Multiplies a ZDF signal by a specified gain factor. The gain input is non-triggering,
therefore this gain Macro is similar to the modulation multiplier.
•
Subtractor: Subtracts one ZDF signal from another. A convenience shortcut for a combina-
tion of an adder and a -1 gain.
Each 'audio signal connection wire' in the ZDF toolkit needs to be implemented by two parallel
wires:
A single audio path implemented by two parallel ZDF wires.
Each feedback loop needs to be implemented by a single nonsolid Macro. The following SVF
Structure illustrates.
Macro Reference
Toolkits
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 157


--- Page 158 ---

A nonsolid Structure implementing the main part of a low-pass SVF.
The guidelines are the following.
•
Each Macro must implement exactly one feedback loop. Any other feedback loops (if ex-
isting) should be contained in the nested Macros built according to the same guidelines.
•
The Macro may have exactly one audio input. This input must be directly connected to an
Input -Fbk (as in the picture above) or an Input +Fbk Macro from the ZDF toolkit. This
Input ±Fbk Macro is the point where the input signal is 'injected' into the feedback loop.
The difference between the two Macros is simply that Input -Fbk inverts the feedback signal. One
could use a ZDF gain Macro to invert the signal instead.
•
The audio path inside the feedback loop may split and merged back (for example in the
picture above the path splits after the first integrator and is merged back at the adder).
However no further feedback loops are allowed, except in the nested Macros built accord-
ing to the same guidelines.
Sometimes this limitation can be worked around by treating two feedback loops as one loop 'nest-
ed' into the other. However, there are situations where the inner feedback loop is 'instantaneously
unstable' (see the instantaneous instability discussion below) on its own, and only the presence of
the outer feedback loop stabilizes it back. In this case such nesting decompositions will not be
handled correctly by the ZDF toolkit, as it requires each feedback loop to be stable (in the instan-
taneous sense only) on its own, without outer stabilization factors. This is for example the reason
why a non-transposed version of the Sallen–Key filter cannot be (directly, without additional man-
ual 'hacks') implemented by the ZDF toolkit.
Macro Reference
Toolkits
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 158


--- Page 159 ---

•
The Macro may have several outputs. However each output needs to be 'implemented' by
a dedicated Output Macro from the ZDF toolkit. The Ext input of the Output Macro needs
to be connected to the Ext output of the Input Macro of the Structure.
The outermost Macro of a ZDF implementation should be (normally) a solid Macro and imple-
ment the conversion between the ordinary and ZDF audio signals (using to ZDF and from ZDF
Macros from the toolkit):
The outermost Structure of a ZDF low-pass SVF implementation.
Besides the audio conversion, this Structure is using an F to w/2 Macro from the ZDF toolkit to
convert the cutoff in Hz to a pre-warped half-cutoff for the ZDF integrators. It also converts the
resonance parameter into the damping gain 2R.
The above guidelines can be violated in principle, as long as the following hard restric-
tions are taken into account: Each feedback loop must have only a single input point
implemented by an Input ±Fbk Macro and correctly employ the ZDF Output Macros. The
guidelines simply provide a framework for following these hard restrictions.
Saturators
In order to build filters which can self-oscillate one needs to introduce saturating nonlinearities
into the filters. The ZDF toolkit provides two different versions of a tanh saturator and a satu-
rating integrator:
Saturating ZDF primitives.
Macro Reference
Toolkits
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 159


--- Page 160 ---

The L input controls the saturation level (the horizontal asymptote of the saturation curve).
Filter Primitives
Often filters are used as building blocks for more complex filters. The Filter Primitives subme-
nu of the ZDF toolkit contains some of such low-level filters.
The following example illustrates how a ladder filter is built from four 1-pole filters.
Ladder filter Structure.
Instantaneous Instability
At certain extreme parameter settings (typically, in cases of excessive positive feedback) the
routine application of the ZDF approach will not deliver correct results anymore. The mathe-
matical reasons for this can be found in the corresponding literature. What this means practi-
cally is that the denominator of the zero delay feedback equation becomes zero or negative,
which can be checked by monitoring the denominator value inside the feedback solver, which
is located inside Input ±Fbk Macros:
Macro Reference
Toolkits
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 160


--- Page 161 ---

The feedback solver inside the Input -Fbk Macro. The denominator value is available at the 1/G port of the solver.
The instantaneous instability normally happens far in the seloscillation range of the filters or in
some untypical designs or usage cases. Some of the examples are the following.
•
Ladder filter with excessive unclipped negative resonance settings (since the ladder filter
employs an inverted feedback, negative resonance means positive feedback).
•
SVF with excessive unclipped resonance settings (in the self-oscillation range the internal
damping of the SVF is negative, which together with the inversion of the feedback signal
results in a positive feedback).
•
An attempt to implement a non-transposed Sallen–Key filter by feedback loop decomposi-
tion. The Sallen–Key filter has two feedback points. Since each feedback point needs to
be implemented by a dedicated Input ±Fbk Macro, and since there can be only one such
Macro per feedback loop, it is not implementable in a straightforward manner using the
ZDF toolkit. One could attempt a workaround, by decomposing it into two feedback loops,
one nested into the other. However, the inner feedback loop employs positive feedback,
which at certain (not excessive at all) settings can become instantaneously unstable on its
own. It is the presence of the outer loop which stabilizes the inner feedback again. The
instantaneous instability of the inner loop results in the ill-conditioning of the entire
Structure, and the filter may produce INFs and NaNs at its output and in its state as the
result.
This problem with the non-transposed Sallen–Key filter is not the limitation of the ZDF approach
as such, but the one of the toolkit. In principle, with some manual 'hacking' the toolkit also could
allow a non-transposed Sallen–Key filter implementation.
Macro Reference
Toolkits
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 161


--- Page 162 ---

It is the Structure builder’s responsibility to clip the filter parameters, if necessary, so
that the instantaneous instability does not occur.
6.4.4
TF toolkit
 
The 'transfer function' toolkit (located under Library > Audio > Filter > Tranfer Func > TF Tool-
kit) contains the building blocks of the transfer function Macros in the Core Macro Library and
can be used to modify the existing transfer function Macros or build the new ones.
The absolute majority of the Macros in the toolkit are simply implementing the complex math
operations. The complex values themselves are represented by a Bundle containing Re and Im
fibers.
The special 'input' and 'output' Macros of the toolkit are the following Macros.
•
s: This Macro takes the specified frequency f and the specified cutoff frequency F and
produces an imaginary value j f / F. This complex value specifies the point on the s-plane
where the (unit cutoff) transfer function needs to be evaluated.
•
to Polar: This Macro converts a complex value z to its absolute magnitude |z| and argu-
ment arg z. Normally used to obtain amplitude and phase responses from the frequency
response value.
Macro Reference
Toolkits
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 162

