--- Page 15 ---

2
REAKTOR Core Fundamentals
 
2.1
An Introduction to Core Cells
 
REAKTOR Core is a special level of functionality within REAKTOR with a distinct set of fea-
tures. Similarly to the main part of REAKTOR (which we will refer to as the Primary level of
REAKTOR), the Core level is also using a graphical signal flow paradigm. However, there are a
number of important differences in the details between the Primary and the Core levels:
•
REAKTOR Core is using an integrated run-time compiler, allowing efficient processing of
highly detailed low-level Structures.
•
The low-level Structure building features of REAKTOR Core make it specifically suitable
for implementing custom DSP algorithms.
•
The details of the rules of signal processing in REAKTOR Core are different from Primary
level and are tailored to the needs of the DSP algorithm design.
•
REAKTOR Core is using a different set of basic Modules and a different Macro library.
The REAKTOR Core Structures exist inside special wrapper objects called Core Cells. Core
Cells can be considered as a special kind of Primary level Macros, where the difference is that
inside Core Cells there is a different world of REAKTOR Core.
In order to create a new blank Core Cell right-click somewhere in the background of the REAK-
TOR Structure and select New Core Cell from the context menu:
REAKTOR Core Fundamentals
An Introduction to Core Cells
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 15


--- Page 16 ---

Creating a new Core Cell from the context menu.
The prebuilt Core Cells from the factory and user libraries can be found in the Library menu
among Primary Macros and Instruments.
Core Cells look like a special type of the Primary level Modules:
A Core Cell.
Similarly to Primary level Macros, Core Cells have internal Structures, which can be navigated
to by double-clicking the Core Cell.
REAKTOR Core Fundamentals
An Introduction to Core Cells
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 16


--- Page 17 ---

2.2
Core Structures
 
Core level Structures (or simply 'Core Structures') are the Structures contained inside Core Cells
and Core Macros. These Structures look like follows:
The internal Structure of a Core Cell.
The most obvious difference from the Primary Structure is the frame with three different areas
(1), (2) and (3).
(1) Normal Modules area: The bigger area in the middle (referred to as the normal Modules area
or simply normal area) is where the majority of the Structure's Modules (more specifically, the
so-called normal Modules) are typically located. The Core level Macros are also inserted here
among the other normal Modules.
(2) Input area: The smaller area on the left is where the input port Modules are located.
(3) Output area: The smaller area on the right is where the output port Modules are located.
The three areas can contain only the Modules of the respective flavor, that is the normal area
can contain only the normal Modules and the input and output areas can contain only the in-
put and output port Modules respectively.
The normal Modules can be moved freely in both horizontal and vertical directions. The input
and output port Modules can be moved only vertically. Their vertical positions specify the order
in which they appear on the outside of the Core Cell or a Core level Macro. Changing their rela-
tive vertical positions changes their outside order.
REAKTOR Core Fundamentals
Core Structures
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 17


--- Page 18 ---

In order to create a new Module in a Core Structure, right-click on the background inside of
one of these three areas. Depending on which of the three areas is clicked, a context menu with a
different list of available Modules appears.
1.
For example, right-click on the normal area to access the normal Modules:
Pretty much any editing done to a Core Cell Structure will cause it to recompile. For
small and simple Core Cells the compilation typically happens very quickly, but for large
or complicated Core Cells it might take noticeable amounts of time. During the compila-
tion, the progress is displayed in REAKTOR's toolbar by an orange gradient moving over
the CPU load display:
Structure Shrinking
As more Modules are inserted into the Structure and/or moved around within the Structure, the
enclosing frame will grow to accommodate the Modules. The frame never shrinks back though.
REAKTOR Core Fundamentals
Core Structures
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 18


--- Page 19 ---

1.
In order to make the frame shrink back, right-click on the background somewhere within
the Structure and select Compact Board from the context menu.
The shrinking will not change the distances between the Modules (except possibly the distances
from the inputs and the outputs to the normal Modules). There is also some hard-coded minimum
size which the shrinking will not go beyond.
2.3
Built-in Modules
 
The ideas and conventions behind the groups of Modules available in the Built-In Module sub-
menu of the normal area context menu are discussed in different places of the manual accord-
ing to their function. The information about specific Modules can be found directly within the
software in the Module's info.
•
Const: The Core constants are very similar to the Primary level constants. See section
↑4.4, Initialization for additional details.
REAKTOR Core Fundamentals
Built-in Modules
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 19


--- Page 20 ---

The value of the Core constants cannot be changed in the name field of the Properties, one has to
use the dedicated value property field:
•
Math: See sections ↑4.1, Events and ↑4.2, Processing Order.
•
Bit: This group is simply an extension of the Math group dedicated to the integer bit arith-
metic.
•
Flow: See section ↑4.8, Routing and Merging.
•
Memory: See sections ↑4.3, Object Bus Connections (OBC) and ↑4.7, Arrays.
•
Scoped Bus: See section ↑3.3, Scoped Buses.
•
Bundle: See section ↑3.4, Bundles.
•
Macro: See section ↑2.6, Core Macros.
2.4
Core Connection Types
 
REAKTOR Core Structures are using several different types of connections. Respectively there
are different types of the input and output ports of the Modules used inside Core. These types
fall into several different classes.
The connections between ports of different classes are not possible. Whether the connections
between different port types within the same class are possible varies from one class to anoth-
er.
REAKTOR Core Fundamentals
Core Connection Types
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 20


--- Page 21 ---

2.4.1
Scalar
 
Scalar is the most commonly used class. Scalar connections can be either of float (floating-
point) or int (integer) type, of which float is more commonly used.
A connection between float ports.
A connection between int ports.
All scalar types are connection-compatible to each other (meaning it is possible to connect a
float output to an int input or vice versa). The values of one type will be automatically convert-
ed into another wherever necessary:
A float output connected to an int input.
Upon conversion from float to an int the value is rounded to the nearest integer.
For the values which are exactly in between, the rounding direction is conceptually un-
defined. For example, 1.5 can be rounded to 1 or to 2. It is not advisable to rely on a
specific direction of that rounding for any of such 'exactly-in-between' values, even if it
seems fully consistent and reliable in the current REAKTOR version. The rounding could
change e.g. on a different hardware architecture or for whatever other reason. As a gen-
eral rule one should not rely on the implementation details which are undefined by the
specification, especially if they are explicitly mentioned as undefined.
REAKTOR Core Fundamentals
Core Connection Types
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 21


--- Page 22 ---

Type Configuration
For many of Core's built-in Modules, particularly for those which perform mathematical opera-
tions, the scalar type can be reconfigured in the Properties:
Scalar configuration properties of an adder.
The Signal Type property can be switched between Float and Int. The FP Precision setting (ap-
plicable only to the float mode) can be Default, 32 bit or 64 bit. Normally it should be left at
Default, which means that the Module will use the default floating point precision of the given
Structure, where the latter (unless reconfigured by the builder) is 32 bit. The 64 bit precision
is needed in exceptional cases. The precision is not reflected visually in the look of Modules,
ports or connections. The precision does not affect the compatibility of connections either, au-
tomatic precision conversion will occur wherever necessary.
Conceptually, a 32 bit float precision setting does not guarantee that it will have exactly 32 bit
precision. It means that the precision will be at least 32 bits. The same holds for 64 bit.
The 32 bit float is the type used by Primary audio and event connections.
2.4.2
OBC
 
The OBC class is used for identification of the memory storage items (see the discussion in
section ↑4.3, Object Bus Connections (OBC)), where the items can be of latch (for single varia-
bles) or array type. Each of these types can be float or integer.
REAKTOR Core Fundamentals
Core Connection Types
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 22


--- Page 23 ---

A connection between float OBC ports of type latch.
A connection between int OBC ports of type latch.
A connection between float OBC ports of type array.
A connection between int OBC ports of type array.
Differently from the scalar connections, the OBC connections of different types are not com-
patible to each other.
Type Configuration
Similarly to the scalar processing Modules, most of the OBC Modules feature the possibility of
type configuration in the Properties:
REAKTOR Core Fundamentals
Core Connection Types
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 23


--- Page 24 ---

OBC configuration properties of a Read Module.
Besides affecting the OBC port types, these properties also affect the type of the memory stor-
age associated with the OBC Module.
Differently from scalar processing Modules, the float OBC connections of different precision
settings are not compatible to each other. Particularly, the Default precision setting is not
compatible to the others (e.g. it is not compatible to 32 bit setting even if the actual precision
corresponding to the Default setting is 32 bit). Normally the Default precision setting should
be used. See sections ↑2.5.3, Properties and ↑2.6.3, Properties for further details of precision
control.
2.4.3
BoolCtl
 
The BoolCtl class contains a single type, which is also called BoolCtl (Boolean control). These
connections are used for router control signals (see section ↑4.8, Routing and Merging).
A connection between BoolCtl ports.
The BoolCtl type does not have any further configuration parameters.
2.4.4
Bundle
 
Bundles are 'multiwire cable' connections. They are simply containers for the nested connec-
tions.
REAKTOR Core Fundamentals
Core Connection Types
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 24


--- Page 25 ---

A connection between Bundle ports.
The Bundle type itself does not have any configuration parameters. However the contents of
the cable vary depending on its source. In principle any Bundle output can be connected to
any Bundle inputs, but the connection may still be considered erroneous if the contents of the
incoming Bundle do not match the expectations of the connection destination's owner. See
section ↑3.4, Bundles for further details about using the Bundle connections.
2.4.5
Connection Defaults
 
Inputs which are left unconnected still normally have a defined functionality. This functionality
can be specifically defined by each Module for each of its inputs separately. Particularly, a
Macro builder can specify the meaning of the disconnected Macro inputs for each of its inputs
(see section ↑2.6.1, Inputs). In practice, however, there are most commonly used defaults.
These defaults are used for the Macro inputs, unless specifically overridden by the Macro
builder, and are also used for the built-in Modules, unless the Module's documentation says
otherwise.
•
Scalar inputs default to a zero constant. This means that the input behaves exactly as if
there was a zero constant connected to it, including the initialization behavior (see sec-
tion ↑4.4, Initialization).
•
Non-array OBC inputs default to a unique storage location. This rule is abundantly used in
storage manipulation (see section ↑4.3, Object Bus Connections (OBC)).
•
Array OBC inputs, unless explicitly specified otherwise, should not be left disconnected. A
disconnected array OBC input has undefined semantics, except that it is guaranteed not
to affect the correctly connected OBC memory.
•
BoolCtl inputs default to a false signal.
•
Bundle inputs default to an empty Bundle.
REAKTOR Core Fundamentals
Core Connection Types
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 25


--- Page 26 ---

2.5
Core Cells in Detail
 
2.5.1
Inputs
 
There are only two different input port Module types available in the Core Cell's input port area
context menu: In and TableRef.
The Core Cell's input port area context menu.
The TableRef input port type is described separately in the Building in Primary document. The
Building in Core document deals exclusively with the Core Cell input ports of type In:
A Core Cell input port Module.
REAKTOR Core Fundamentals
Core Cells in Detail
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 26


--- Page 27 ---

Input Properties
The Properties of a Core Cell input port allow you to specify the port's name and select be-
tween the Audio and Event-mode of the port:
Properties of a Core Cell input port Module.
The Audio/Event-mode specifies whether the input will appear as a Primary level audio or event
port on the outside of the Core Cell.
In the Info Properties tab one can specify the hint text for the port.
2.5.2
Outputs
 
There is only one output port Module type available in the Core Cell's output port area context
menu: Out.
REAKTOR Core Fundamentals
Core Cells in Detail
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 27


--- Page 28 ---

The Core Cell's output port area context menu.
A Core Cell output port Module.
Output Properties
The Properties of a Core Cell's output port are similar to those of the Core Cell input port:
REAKTOR Core Fundamentals
Core Cells in Detail
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 28


--- Page 29 ---

Properties of the Core Cell output port Module.
The Audio/Event-mode specifies whether the output will appear as a Primary level audio or
event port on the outside of the Core Cell.
The additional Allow Audio Events checkbox is an advanced option for the event-mode outputs.
By default, the event-mode outputs block internal Core events that are originating from an audio
source (those are the events obtained directly or indirectly from audio-mode inputs of the Core
Cell and from the default internal clock sources of the Core Cell). This is important in order to
avoid events being sent inadvertently from the Core Cell's outputs to the Primary level at audio
rate, which is quite CPU-intensive. If you enable this checkbox, the event-mode output will not
block any events. This option should be used with care. For the audio-mode outputs this check-
box does not have any effect.
In the Info Properties tab one can specify the hint text for the port.
2.5.3
Properties
 
The Core Cells feature two distinct sets of Properties: the 'inside' (Core level) and the 'outside'
(Primary level) ones.
The outside Properties of a Core Cell are accessible when the Core Cell is selected within the
Primary Structure: They contain the Primary level configuration settings of the Core Cell.
REAKTOR Core Fundamentals
Core Cells in Detail
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 29


--- Page 30 ---

The outside Properties of a Core Cell.
The inside Properties of a Core Cell are accessible by clicking the background of the Core
Cell's internal Structure:
The inside Properties of a Core Cell.
The Core Cell name and (editable) Info properties are shared between the inside and the out-
side Properties and can be equally accessed from either side.
REAKTOR Core Fundamentals
Core Cells in Detail
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 30


--- Page 31 ---

The FP Precision property selects the meaning of the 'default' setting of the float type objects
(Modules and ports) within the Core Cell's Structure. Simply put, the floating-point computa-
tions inside the Core Cell will be performed at this precision, unless explicitly overridden for
certain elements within the Structure.
•
Default: use the system-default setting, whatever that is. Technically this is 32 bit, the
same as within Primary level. This setting should be used whenever possible (that is, un-
less there is a special reason to use a different setting).
•
32 bit: use 32 bit floats by default
•
64 bit: use 64 bit floats by default
2.6
Core Macros
 
Conceptually seen, a Core Macro is not different from a Primary level Macro. This is simply a
container Module which has another Core Structure inside:
A Core Macro.
REAKTOR Core Fundamentals
Core Macros
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 31


--- Page 32 ---

1.
To create a new blank Macro, right-click in the normal area of a Core Structure and select
New Macro from the context menu.
In the normal area context menu next to the Built-In Module submenu there is a Library sub-
menu containing the factory library and the user library Macros:
REAKTOR Core Fundamentals
Core Macros
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 32


--- Page 33 ---

The Library submenu in the Core Macro's normal area context menu.
The internal Structures of Core Macros are very much like the ones of Core Cells, except that
the available input and output port types are different.
2.6.1
Inputs
 
The input types available in the input port area context menu of a Macro Structure correspond
to different connection classes available in Core (see section ↑2.4, Core Connection Types for
the connection classes and type discussion).
REAKTOR Core Fundamentals
Core Macros
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 33


--- Page 34 ---

The Core Macro's input port area context menu.
•
In: Creates a scalar type port. This is the most commonly used port type, which can be
configured to float or int, of which float is most commonly used.
•
OBC: Creates an OBC type port.
•
BoolCtl: Creates a BoolCtl type port.
•
Bundle: Creates a Bundle type port.
A Core Macro input port Module of float type.
The set of available properties of an input port Module varies depending on the Module type.
Here one can switch the signal type between float and integer, control the floating point preci-
sion etc.
REAKTOR Core Fundamentals
Core Macros
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 34


--- Page 35 ---

Default Connection
Differently from Core Cell port Modules, which have only an output, the Macro input port Mod-
ules also feature an input. This input is typically left disconnected and is only used if one
wants to override the default behavior of the corresponding port on the outside of the Macro.
Technically, if a Macro input (on the outside of the Macro) is disconnected, the input connec-
tion of the corresponding input port Module inside the Macro will be used instead. So, if there
is e.g. a constant of 1 connected to the 'default' input of the input port Module, then a discon-
nected Macro port will default to 1 rather than 0:
A Core Macro input port Module with a non-zero default signal.
2.6.2
Outputs
 
The output types available in the output port area context menu of a Macro Structure are ex-
actly the same as the input types. Except for the absence of the 'default connection' function-
ality, the output port configuration is exactly the same as that of the inputs.
2.6.3
Properties
 
The Properties of a Macro can be accessed in two different ways:
1.
Select the Macro from the outside, from the Structure it is contained in.
2.
Left-click on the Structure background inside the Macro.
In other words, the inside and the outside Properties of a Macro are identical.
REAKTOR Core Fundamentals
Core Macros
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 35


--- Page 36 ---

Properties of a Core Macro.
•
FP Precision: controls the default precision of the float-type objects (Modules and ports)
inside the Macro. It allows to specify the precision of the floating point computations in-
side the entire Macro (including the nested Macros), except for the areas which are ex-
plicitly configured to different precision settings. Usually this property should be left in
the Default setting.
◦Default: use the same precision as the Structure that contains the Macro.
◦32 bit: objects configured to default precision will use 32 bit precision floats (notice,
that formally these objects are still considered to be configured to the default preci-
sion!) The respective float ports (scalar and OBC) on the outside of the Macro will ap-
pear as explicitly configured to 32 bit. In particular, a float OBC port which is config-
ured to the default precision setting will appear as a default-precision port on the in-
side of the Macro and as a 32 bit precision port on the outside of the Macro.
◦64 bit: the same as 32 bit, except the precision is 64 bit.
•
Solid: controls the solidity of the Macro. Affects the resolution of the feedback loops (see
section ↑4.10.3, Nonsolid Macros and Feedback Loops) and the visibility of the Scoped
Buses (see section ↑3.3.6, Solid Areas). This property must be left in the 'On' state unless
the Macro explicitly needs to be non-solid, otherwise it may make the Structure more
REAKTOR Core Fundamentals
Core Macros
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 36


--- Page 37 ---

prone to difficult to find building errors and sometimes unnecessarily increase compila-
tion times. The nonsolid Macros can be told visually by ragged edges, while their internal
Structures can be told by dashed frames:
•
Look: controls the outside look of the Macro. There are large, medium and small settings:
•
Pin Alignment: controls whether the ports of the Macro should be aligned to the top, cen-
ter or bottom in the outside look:
•
Select Icon / Clear Icon: allows to load or unload a picture to be displayed in the outside
look of the Macro. It is recommended to use a picture with an alpha channel (in PNG or
TGA format).
2.7
Saving Core Cells and Core Macros
 
Similarly to the Primary Macros it is possible to save Core Cells and Core Macros as individual
files as well as load them back into the Structure.
REAKTOR Core Fundamentals
Saving Core Cells and Core Macros
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 37


--- Page 38 ---

1.
To save a Core Cell or a Core Macro, right-click it and select Save Core Cell As… or
Save As… respectively.
The Save As… function can also be used for built-in Core Modules. They are saved to the same
file format as Core Macros. One can use this to save built-in Core Modules with preconfigured
Properties, if desired.
REAKTOR Core Fundamentals
Saving Core Cells and Core Macros
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 38


--- Page 39 ---

1.
To load Core Cell and Core Macro files back, right-click on the background of the Primary
or Core Structure (for Core Macros/Modules the right-click has to be within the normal
area) and select Library > Load….
Similarly to the user library folder "Primary" for Primary level objects, there is a folder called
"Core" for Core level objects. The folders and the Core objects located in this folder will show
up in the Library submenu after a separator.
Notice that while Core Macros and Modules belong to the "Core" folder, the Core Cells
belong to the "Primary" folder, since they are inserted from the Primary level and respec-
tively need to be available in the Primary level context menu.
REAKTOR Core Fundamentals
Saving Core Cells and Core Macros
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 39

