--- Page 67 ---

4
Processing Model of Core
 
4.1
Events
 
A fundamental concept of signal processing in Core is the event. Similarly to the Primary level,
an event within REAKTOR Core simply means that at some point in time a value has been gen-
erated at some output port. This value is immediately transmitted further downstream along
the wires (or connections of other kinds), which is referred to as 'an event is being sent from
the output to the connected inputs.' The downstream Modules then usually generate further
events at their outputs in response to the incoming events.
The default event triggering convention in Core is the following: a Module sends an output event
in response to an incoming event at any of its inputs.
This convention is most commonly used for the math processing Modules such as the ones
found in Built-In Module > Math and Built-In Module > Bit menus. See section ↑5.1, Expres-
sion Computation for an example of efficient use of this convention. Nevertheless, there are a
number of other different triggering conventions used for certain groups of Modules or individ-
ual Modules (constants, Core Cell inputs, Modulation Macros, audio processing Macros, audio
generation Macros etc.). These conventions are described in the respective areas of the man-
ual.
Differently from Primary, within REAKTOR Core Structures there is no distinction be-
tween audio- and event-mode connections. In Core everything is an event. An audio sig-
nal is simply consisting of events regularly sent at the sampling rate.
Conversion between Primary and Core Signals
The conversion between Primary audio/event signals and Core event signals is done according
to the following:
•
The audio-mode input ports of Core Cells produce events at the sampling rate of the Pri-
mary Ensemble.
•
The event-mode input ports of Core Cells forward Primary level events arriving on the out-
side of the Core Cell to the Core Cell's internal Structure.
Processing Model of Core
Events
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 67


--- Page 68 ---

Respectively:
•
The audio-mode output ports of Core Cells simply make their internal (Core level) value
available to the external Primary level. This internal value is simply the value of the most
recently arrived event.
•
The event-mode output ports of Core Cells simply forward the internally arriving events to
the external Primary level.
The Primary level does not support simultaneous events (see section ↑4.2, Processing
Order for the discussion of simultaneous events in Core). If several Core events arrive si-
multaneously at the event-mode outputs of a Core Cell, they will be sent to the outside
Primary Structure consecutively, one after the other. The order of sending is 'top-to-bot-
tom', according to the visual ordering of the Core Cell output ports. The events are sent
immediately upon the completion of the respective handler (see section ↑5.6.1, Core
Cell Handlers). Particularly, if the events are generated from the audio handler, they will
be sent before any further audio processing is done in the Primary Structure.
Event Processing and Triggering Example
The following example Core Cell Structure implements an event signal inverter Core Cell:
A simple audio inverter Core Cell.
The Structure consists of an event-mode input port Module, an event-mode output port Module
and a Core level inverter Module connected in between, where the latter can be found under
Built-In Module > Math > -x. Since in Core there is no difference between audio and events,
the built-in Core level inverter Module does not need to be configured (neither automatically
nor manually) to an audio or an event-mode.
Processing Model of Core
Events
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 68


--- Page 69 ---

The processing of an incoming Primary level event by the above Core Cell is happening like fol-
lows:
1.
A Primary level event is arriving at the Core Cell's event input
2.
The Core Cell's event input is converting the Primary event into the Core event, which is
then sent from the output of the input port Module inside the Core Structure.
3.
The event reaches the input of the -x Module.
4.
The -x Module is inverting the value and sends the result as its output event.
5.
The event reaches the input of the Core Cell's output port Module.
6.
The Core Cell's output port is converting the Core event into the Primary event and sends
it further within the Primary level.
The above Core Cell can be turned into an audio inverter Core Cell by simply reconfiguring the
input and output port Modules of the Core Cell to the audio-mode. In this case the input port
Module will send the events regularly at the audio rate. Configuring the Core Cell's ports to an
event-mode input and an audio-mode output is also possible.
One also can configure the input to the audio-mode and the output to the event-mode. In this
case the expected behavior of the Core Cell is to send the Primary level output events at an
audio rate. However, since the Primary level handles the events differently from Core, such a
dense event stream on the Primary level will typically cause a noticeable CPU overhead. In or-
der to avoid accidentally doing this by mistake, the Core Cell's output port has the Allow Audio
Events property, which is disabled by default. When disabled, it will prevent the events origi-
nating at the Core Cell's audio-mode inputs (or another audio rate source, such as SR.C and
CR.C) from being sent to the Primary level, blocking the events completely. The property has
no effect on audio-mode ports.
Events derived from an audio rate source by routing (e.g. custom CR.C of a lower rate) will be
equally blocked. On the other hand, the events derived from the event-mode Core Cell ports are
not blocked. The initialization event (see the discussion of the initialization event in section ↑4.4,
Initialization), including the initialization event obtained from the audio-mode Core Cell ports, is
not blocked either.
Processing Model of Core
Events
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 69


--- Page 70 ---

4.2
Processing Order
 
As long as a Core event is processed exclusively in a serial fashion, there is no difference be-
tween Primary and Core event processing. The event is simply propagated downstream from
one Module to the other. There is however a fundamental difference if the event propagation
path splits into several branches.
On the Primary level an event that is sent to more than one destination is forwarded to each of
these destinations in turn, one destination after the other. If the event paths later merge back
again, then, instead of one event arriving at the mergepoint, there are two or more, depending
on how many parallel paths the event was split into before merging back (for details about Pri-
mary level event processing, see the Building in Primary document).
In Core (logically seen) an event is sent to all such parallel destinations simultaneously on all
paths. The following Core Cell Structure illustrates this:
A Core Cell Structure illustrating the simultaneity of parallel events in Core.
The purpose of this Core Cell is simply to double the values of the incoming events. Instead of
multiplying the values by 2, the signal's value is added to itself by using the adder Module
(Built-In Module > Math > +).
Each incoming event is sent to the two inputs of the adder on two parallel paths. In Primary,
the incoming event would first arrive at one input of the adder, producing an output event at
the adder's output, and later it would arrive at the other input of the adder, producing another
output event at the adder's output. Thus, for each incoming audio event the adder would have
Processing Model of Core
Processing Order
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 70


--- Page 71 ---

generated two output events. This would lead not only to a doubling of the value, but also to a
doubling of the count of the incoming event. In Core, the event arrives simultaneously at both
inputs of the adder, so the adder produces a single output event.
The simultaneity of parallel events is of course extended to more complicated Structures, e.g.
like the following one:
Another Core Cell Structure illustrating the event parallelism in Core.
In this Structure the event is going through the absolute value Module on the upper path and
through the inverter on the lower path, and then both paths are merged by the adder. Of
course, internally one of the two parallel Modules (the absolute value and the inverter) will be
processed before the other. However, both the output event of the absolute value Module and
the output event of the inverter Module will arrive at the adder's inputs simultaneously, thereby
producing one event at the adder's output.
Thus, logically seen, it is impossible to tell which of the two parallel Modules (the absolute val-
ue and the inverter) has been processed first. From the formal point of view, both Modules can
be considered as being processed simultaneously.
The processing order rule in Core is the following. If two Modules are connected by a
unidirectional path (that is one can start at one of the Modules and reach the other one
by always going only 'downstream' or only 'upstream') then the upstream Module is proc-
essed before the downstream one. If there is no unidirectional path between the two
Modules, then their relative processing order is undefined. Such unordered Modules can
be considered as 'simultaneously processed' ones.
The 'simultaneous processing' paradigm is not applicable to the explicit accesses to the memory
by the OBC Modules. Memory accesses from the unordered Modules are serial and unordered.
Processing Model of Core
Processing Order
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 71


--- Page 72 ---

4.3
Object Bus Connections (OBC)
 
Explicit memory storage is handled in Core by the Read and Write Modules performing the
memory reading and the memory writing operations respectively. These Modules can be found
under the Built-In Module > Memory menu. For the purpose of identifying the storage items
referred to by these Modules, Core uses a dedicated connection class, called OBC (Object Bus
Connection):
A simple event accumulator Core Cell.
In the above Core Structure there is a Read Module on the left, followed by an adder, followed
by a Write Module. The direct connection between a Read Module and a Write Module is an
OBC connection. It means that the Read and the Write Modules access the same storage (or
the same variable, in terms of text-based programming languages). This storage is implicitly
created by the mere fact that the Read and the Write Modules want to access some storage.
Had there been no OBC connection between the Read and Write Modules, they would have ac-
cessed two independent storage items.
All Read and Write Modules connected together by OBC connections access one and the
same memory storage (as long as there are no special OBC Modules, like e.g. the Index
Module in between them).
The above Structure implements a simple event accumulator and works as follows:
1.
An incoming event from the Primary level is converted into a Core event by the input Mod-
ule and is sent to the Read Module and to the adder.
Processing Model of Core
Object Bus Connections (OBC)
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 72


--- Page 73 ---

2.
The event arrives at the upper input of the Read Module. This is the clock or triggering
input of the Read Module. In response to this clock event the Read Module reads the val-
ue from the memory and sends it from its upper output (the initial value of the memory is
zero).
3.
The event from the input Module and the event from the Read Module simultaneously ar-
rive at the inputs of the adder. The adder computes the sum and sends it from its output.
4.
The output event from the adder is sent to the Core Cell's output and also to the Write
Module. The Write Module stores the new value of the accumulated sum in the memory,
while the output forwards the same value to the Primary level.
The arrays and array connections which are a special kind of OBC are discussed separately in sec-
tion ↑4.7, Arrays.
Memory Access Ordering
In typical cases the memory accesses are naturally ordered by the OBC connection between
the Read and the Write Modules. However, it is possible to construct Structures where these
accesses are not ordered relative to each other:
Unordered memory accesses.
In the above picture the two Write Modules are ordered relative to the Read Module, but are
not ordered relative to each other. If an event comes simultaneously on both wires, then it is
not defined which value will be written first and which second. Such Structures are generally not
recommended, unless the access order is explicitly unimportant.
As in the other cases of unspecified behavior, it is highly unrecommended to rely on the
de-facto ordering of conceptually unordered OBC Modules, even if this ordering seems
consistent.
Processing Model of Core
Object Bus Connections (OBC)
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 73


--- Page 74 ---

As a general rule, it is recommended to ensure the correct ordering of the OBC Modules
(accessing the same memory) by arranging them serially along one and the same OBC
wire.
Macro boundaries by themselves do not ensure any ordering (please see section ↑4.7.4,
Advanced OBC Ordering for a more detailed explanation).
4.4
Initialization
 
Upon loading, before the regular processing begins, the Core Structures are getting initialized.
The Core Cell initialization is performed as a part of the Primary level initialization process
(please see the Building in Primary document for more information).The Core Cell initialization
runs in the following steps.
•
Firstly, all writable memory of the Core Cell is reset to zero. This includes the states of the
output ports and the OBC storage.
•
Then, an initialization event is sent simultaneously from all initialization event sources,
which include the following.
◦Audio-mode Core Cell inputs. These always send the initialization event. The value of
the event is equal to the value available on the outside of the Core Cell at the moment
of the Core Cell's initialization.
◦Event-mode Core Cell inputs. These send the initialization event if and only if there is
a Primary level initialization event coming from the outside at the moment of the Core
Cell's initialization. The event's value is equal to the value of the incoming Primary
level event.
◦Constants and QuickConsts (also including unconnected inputs without special de-
fault meaning as well as scoped and Bundle pickups which failed to connect). These
always send the initialization event. The value of the event is equal to the constant's
value. The constants never send any other events afterwards.
•
After that, the Primary level initialization process might send additional events after the
Core's initialization event is finished. From a Core perspective these events are regular
events, not initialization events.
Processing Model of Core
Initialization
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 74


--- Page 75 ---

Initialization Example
The following Core Cell Structure demonstrates the effects of the initialization process (the
Structure has a bug, which is embedded there for the demonstration purposes):
A (faulty) event counter Core Cell.
At the first glance, this Structure should implement an event counter (notice the integer mode
of the Modules used in the Structure). However, this Structure has a bug. If no Primary events
have ever been sent to the Core Cell's input, the output value of the Core Cell (and the value
stored internally in the OBC memory of the counter) is still one rather than zero. Furthermore,
even though there is no incoming initialization event on the Primary side, the event counter
Core Cell sends an initialization event (of value 1) from its Primary level output.
The reason for this are the details of the Core Structure initialization which runs as follows:
1.
The shared OBC storage of the Read/Write Module pair and the output port states are ze-
roed.
2.
The initialization event is sent from the constant "1" Module. Assuming there is no incom-
ing initialization event from the Primary level at the Core Cell's input, there are no other
initialization event sources in the Structure.
3.
In response to the incoming event from the constant Module the adder computes the sum
of the input values, where the lower input value is obtained from the just zeroed output of
the Read Module. Thus, the adder outputs a value of 1.
4.
The value of the sum is written into the OBC storage and is sent to the Core Cell's output.
Such problems can be avoided by using latches (discussed in section ↑4.5, Clocks and Latch-
es) and/or Modulation Macros (discussed in section ↑4.6, Modulation Macros).
Processing Model of Core
Initialization
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 75


--- Page 76 ---

4.5
Clocks and Latches
 
A factory library Latch Macro is available under Library > Memory > Latch:
A Latch Macro.
An integer version of the latch is available in the same menu under the name ILatch.
The upper input of the Latch Macro is the value input. The lower input of the Latch Macro is
the event or the clock input. The output combines both into one event where the value is taken
from the upper input and the clock or the triggering is taken from the lower input.
The Latch Macro can be used for two different purposes:
•
Replacing a value of an event with another value:
•
Delaying a sent value until a certain event (clock) occurs:
Both purposes simply represent two different viewpoints on one and the same process.
The second usage purpose (delaying a value) is the reason for the Latch Macro's icon and for the
alignment of the Latch Macro's ports.
The internal Structure of the Latch Macro is very simple:
Processing Model of Core
Clocks and Latches
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 76


--- Page 77 ---

The internal Structure of the Latch Macro.
In this Structure it is imperative that the Write Module precedes the Read Module in the OBC
chain. This ensures that if the value and the clock events arrive simultaneously at the Latch
Macro's inputs, the value will be used to generate the output event.
The opposite ordering (the Read Module preceding the Write Module) is used to build the one-
sample delay (z-1) Macro discussed in section ↑4.10.4, Resolution Mechanism.
The compiler recognizes the 'Write Module followed by a Read' Module OBC pattern and
treats it in special, optimized way. Depending on the circumstances, using a Latch Mac-
ro at a given position in a Structure will produce more efficient code than without using
it. As a general rule, the Core Structures should employ latches where logically appropri-
ate without attempting to minimize their amount.
Usage Examples
The faulty event counter discussed in section ↑4.4, Initialization could have been fixed in one
of the two following ways using the latches.
Processing Model of Core
Clocks and Latches
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 77


--- Page 78 ---

•
Use an integer event accumulator Structure (similar to the float event accumulator dis-
cussed in section ↑4.3, Object Bus Connections (OBC)) and use an integer latch (ILatch)
Macro to replace the values of the incoming events with 1:
•
Start with the faulty Structure discussed in section ↑4.4, Initialization and use a Latch
Macro to make sure that the output event of the constant Module does not trigger the ad-
dition:
Notably, the two Structures are pretty much identical, differing only by the specific pickup
points of the clock signals for the Latch and the Read Module.
The clock inputs completely ignore the incoming signal's value. The Core compiler is aware of
that and drops out the respective computations in the incoming signal's path if these values are
not needed otherwise. Particularly, the compiler will drop a value conversion from int to float if an
int signal is used at a float clock input. For that reason it does not matter whether a clock input is
configured to int or float type. The convention used in Core however is that all clocks are float.
Processing Model of Core
Clocks and Latches
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 78


--- Page 79 ---

The most appropriate way to fix the event counter is by using Modulation Macros, dis-
cussed in section ↑4.6, Modulation Macros.
4.6
Modulation Macros
 
The basic math operation Modules follow the standard Core triggering convention: any input
triggers an output event. Sometimes a different convention is desired, where some inputs
should not trigger the output. This convention is implemented in the Modulation Macros,
found under Library > Math Mod (for Math Modulation).
The following alternative implementation of the event doubler Core Cell from section ↑4.2,
Processing Order illustrates the concept of Modulation Macros:
An alternative implementation of the event doubler Core Cell using a modulation multiplier.
The Macro in the middle is the modulation multiplier, available under Library > Math Mod >
x mul a. If one of the usual built-in multipliers had been used instead, the Structure would
have had the same bug (for exactly the same reason) as the event counter in section ↑4.4, Ini-
tialization. With the modulation multiplier, the constant Module does not trigger the addition,
thus the Structure does not have a bug.
The name 'modulation multiplier' comes from the use case where the amplitude of an event
stream is being modulated by some other 'gain' signal. Clearly, in this case it is not desired
that the events of the 'gain' signal trigger the multiplication:
Processing Model of Core
Modulation Macros
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 79


--- Page 80 ---

Modulation of the amplitude of an event stream
This use case is also the reason for the icon and the port alignment of the Macro. The arrow in
the icon corresponds to the modulation signal input. Additionally, in the name of the Macro
and in the labels of the ports the modulation inputs are denoted with the letters from the be-
ginning of the Latin alphabet ("a", "b", ..).
Occasionally the opposite to the modulation concept is used: the tapping. While the
modulation inputs are inputs that are explicitly declared as non-triggering, a tapping in-
put is explicitly declared as triggering (whereas the remaining inputs are assumed non-
triggering by default).
The internal Structure of the modulation multiplier is using a Latch Macro to prevent the lower
input from triggering the computation:
The internal Structure of the modulation multiplier.
Another good illustration of Modulation Macro usage is yet another way of fixing the event
counter of section ↑4.4, Initialization, besides the two bug-fixing approaches discussed in sec-
tion ↑4.5, Clocks and Latches. The fix is using an integer modulation adder, which is available
under Library > Math Mod > Integer > Ix + a:
Processing Model of Core
Modulation Macros
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 80


--- Page 81 ---

A bug-fixed event counter using a modulation adder.
4.7
Arrays
 
REAKTOR Core supports arrays as a special kind of OBC storage. While ordinary OBC storage is
implicitly defined by the mere fact of using it (by reading or writing), the arrays need to be ex-
plicitly defined by placing an array Module into the structure. There are two array flavors:
•
Writable array (available under Built-In Module > Memory > Array): The number of array
elements is specified in the Properties. As with all writable memory, writable arrays are
zero-initialized upon initialization.
•
Read-only array or Table (available under Built-In Module > Memory > Table): The table is
supposed to be prefilled by the Structure builder using the Table Editor available from the
Table Module's Properties.
The array memory is allocated per voice. Thus an array of 1024 floats in a 16 voice set-
ting needs a total memory for 16*1024=16384 floats, which, considering that each
float needs 4 bytes of storage, is equal to 64 Kbytes.
The read-only tables are allocated just once and are not multiplied with the number of
voices. Furthermore, multiple tables sharing exactly identical sets of data are internally
combined into a single table. Thus having multiple copies of the same table Module
containing a large table does not noticeably increase the memory usage.
Processing Model of Core
Arrays
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 81


--- Page 82 ---

The output port of the Array or Table Modules is of a special array OBC type (which is further
subdivided into int and float types with variable float precision). Thus a Read or a Write Mod-
ule cannot be directly connected to an array. In order to be able to read or write into an array,
a single array element needs to be selected first for access.
A Macro port of the Latch class can be configured to the array connection mode in the Properties.
4.7.1
Array Indexing
 
The array element selection is performed by using the Index Module (Built-In Module > Memo-
ry > Index):
An Index Module.
•
The lower input of the Index Module is of the array OBC type and is supposed to be con-
nected (directly or via some Macro ports and other connectivity features) to the array to be
accessed.
•
The output of the Index Module is of the usual (latch) OBC type and is supposed to be
connected, directly or indirectly, to one or more Read and/or Write Modules.
•
The upper input of the Index Module is of scalar int type. An incoming event at this input
causes a selection of an array element of the corresponding index for the OBC output of
the Index Module.
The indexing is zero-based. That is the valid index range is from 0 to N-1, where N is
the array size.
The result of accessing the array elements out of the valid index range is unspecified, except that
such accesses should not cause memory corruption or crash REAKTOR.
Processing Model of Core
Arrays
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 82


--- Page 83 ---

In the current implementation of the Core compiler the safety of the out of range index
accesses is ensured by internally clipping the index value (in the unsigned integer
mode). However, as with other unspecified behavior, the specific details of this safety
mechanism should be never relied upon. Correctly built REAKTOR Core Structures
should never use out of range index values.
Sometimes it is convenient to be able to automatically determine the size of an array. This func-
tion is provided by the Built-In Module > Memory > Size [] Module. The Module outputs the total
number of the array elements.
The Index Module rarely should be used directly. Typically Read [] and Write [] Macros should
be used instead. For the sake of illustration of the Index Module's functionality the following
two cases are presented:
Usage of raw Index Modules to access array elements (unrecommended).
In the above picture the two Index Modules are used to access the array elements with the in-
dices 7 and 8 respectively, where the 7th element is accessed for reading and the 8th element
for writing.
In principle, it is possible to attach a Read and a Write Module to the same Index Module, e.g.
in series. In this case they are obviously accessing the same array element.
A Read and a Write Module sharing the same Index Module (untypical and unrecommended).
Processing Model of Core
Arrays
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 83


--- Page 84 ---

Neither of the two cases is a recommended way to access the array.
4.7.2
Read [] and Write [] Macros
 
The array accesses typically should be done by using the Read [] and Write [] Macros available
under Library > Memory.
•
The Read [] Macro has a clock input, an index input and an array OBC input. The clock
input triggers the array reading operation at the specified index, sending the read value at
the upper output of the Macro.
•
The Write [] Macro has a value input, an index input and an array OBC input. An incoming
value at the write input causes a write operation at the respective index.
It would have been possible to implement the Read [] Module without the clock input, by using
the event at the index input as the triggering signal for the reading operation. Besides being in-
consistent with the Write [] Macro this would have caused unnecessary CPU overhead if the read-
ing is performed without an actual change of the index. With the index input being separate, the
(rather small) CPU overhead associated with the indexing is occurring only in response to the
events at the index input.
The array OBC inputs and outputs of the Read [] and Write [] Macros are supposed to be used
to order the array accesses relatively to each other:
Processing Model of Core
Arrays
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 84


--- Page 85 ---

An example of the ordering of read and write accesses to an array.
4.7.3
Table Specifics
 
The Table Module works pretty much as an usual array, except that writing into the table is not
possible. The tables also have specific properties.
•
FP Precision: In case the table contains float data, this configures the precision of the
outgoing float OBC connection type (and thus the precision of the compatible Read ac-
cesses). The precision of values internally stored in the table is not affected by this set-
ting.
The Read [] and Write [] Macros can be connected to a table with a non-default FP precision by
changing the FP precision setting of the Read [] and Write [] Macros.
•
Table Editor: Calls up the table editor, which allows to fill the table with values.
Processing Model of Core
Arrays
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 85


--- Page 86 ---

The Table editor.
(1) Create/Resize Table: This button allows you to configure the table's data type and size and
to pre-fill it with a specified initial value.
(2) Import Table Data: This button allows you to load the table from a file. A number of audio
and text file formats are supported, where the latter can be used to import special numeric ta-
bles prepared in other software.
(3) Layout: These buttons turn the numeric display and the wave display on or off.
(4) Wave display: The wave display displays the contents of the table as a wave.
(5) Numeric display: The numeric display can also be used to edit the individual values in the
table.
Processing Model of Core
Arrays
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 86


--- Page 87 ---

4.7.4
Advanced OBC Ordering
 
Some advanced OBC ordering topics can be nicely illustrated by the internal Structure of the
Read [] Macro:
The internal Structure of the Read [] Macro.
The function of the Index and Read Modules is clear. The third Module (the one next to the
OBC output of the Macro) is the R/W Order Module (available under Built-In Module > Memory
> R/W Order).
The R/W Order Module is also used inside the Write [] Macro at the similar position.
Upon the first look this Module might seem to be completely redundant, because the Read []
Macro could have been implemented without it:
A faulty implementation of the Read [] Macro without R/W Order.
Processing Model of Core
Arrays
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 87


--- Page 88 ---

However, in this case the OBC output of the Macro is not ordered relatively to the Read Module
inside the Macro. This means that Modules and Macros (such as e.g. a Write [] Macro) con-
nected to this OBC output will not be ordered relative to the reading operation.
The R/W Order Module inside the Read [] Macro does nothing more than providing a formal
ordering between the Read Module and the OBC output of the Macro, due to the mere fact that
the Read Module is connected to its upper input. The lower input of the R/W Order Module
simply forwards the incoming OBC connection to the output.
The R/W Order Module can also be used for explicit ordering of non-array OBC connections, al-
though there such need is much less likely to occur.
The need for the explicit ordering by the R/W Order Module is not affected by the setting of the
Solid property of the containing Macro. This might be improved in future versions of REAKTOR
Core (without loss of compatibility with older Structures).
4.8
Routing and Merging
 
The Router Module (Built-In Module > Flow > Router) is used to direct the event flow to one of
two alternative paths, where the event flow direction can be switched at runtime:
A Router Module.
Depending on the router state (controlled by the upper input) the events arriving at the lower
input are directed either to the upper output or to the lower output. The upper input (the con-
trol input of the router) is of BoolCtl type and can be in the true or false state.
•
If the control input is in the true state then the events are routed to the upper output.
•
If the control input is in the false state then the evens are routed to the lower output.
The BoolCtl connection does not transmit any events. It only transmits the state but no trigger-
ing information. Therefore it is not a signal in the same sense as the scalar type class.
Processing Model of Core
Routing and Merging
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 88


--- Page 89 ---

The BoolCtl sources are provided by Compare, Compare Sign or ES Ctl Modules in the
Built-In Module > Flow menu.
The comparison criterion of the Compare and Compare Sign Modules can be adjusted in
their Properties.
The Compare Sign Module is useful for detecting zero (and other thresholds) crossings.
There are no Boolean operation built-in Modules to combine different BoolCtl connec-
tions together. Use the Macros from Library > Logic (at the cost of a somewhat higher
CPU load) if you need standard Boolean logical operations.
A signal split by a Router Module can be merged back by the Built-In Module > Flow > Merge:
Merging the two paths back. The Macro Structure implements the absolute value functionality.
The Merge Module simply lets all incoming events go through to the output. If the events arrive
simultaneously at both inputs, the lower input has priority.
Instead of merging the two paths of the split signal, another common pattern is to merge back
with the original signal:
Processing Model of Core
Routing and Merging
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 89


--- Page 90 ---

Merging back to the original signal. The Macro Structure implements the absolute value functionality.
Since the lower input of the Merge Module has higher priority, in case the signal goes through
the inversion path, the inverted signal at the lower input of the Merge Module has priority over
the original (unrouted) non-inverted signal.
The Merge Module does not need to be used exclusively in combination with routers. One can
merge arbitrary events.
In the current implementation of the REAKTOR Core technology this kind of 'chaotic'
merging (as compared to merging the split paths back together or to their original
source) might overload the compiler. Therefore 'chaotic merging' needs to be used with
some care. In cases of large amounts of chaotic merging, the compilation time may grow
excessively. Event reclocking by using latches and Modulation Macros often helps (see
section ↑5.6.3, Routing and Merging).
The math processing Module such as the built-in adder, multiplier etc. technically per-
form event merging. The difference to the Merge Module is solely in how the output val-
ue is computed. Therefore the math processing Structures are subject to the same
'chaotic merging' considerations.
The Merge can be made to have more than 2 inputs by configuring the number of inputs in its
Properties. The priority rule for simultaneous events is the same: the priority is highest at the low-
est input. Intuitively this can be imagined as the events being locally ordered from the top input
Processing Model of Core
Routing and Merging
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 90


--- Page 91 ---

to the bottom one, so that the lowest event is the one which arrives latest of all and thus overrides
the value prepared for the output.
4.9
SR and CR Buses
 
A number of signal processing Modules need to be clocked by some regular trigger sources.
The typical examples are oscillators, filters, envelopes and LFOs. REAKTOR Core provides de-
fault clock sources for such Modules. There are two sources provided in the form of Bundle
Scoped Buses with two different names:
•
SR (for Sampling Rate): The bus with this name is the source of the audio clock.
•
CR (for Control Rate): The bus with this name is the source of the control clock.
The SR bus is intended to be used for audio processing Modules like oscillators and filters,
while the CR bus is intended to be used for control processing Modules like envelopes and
LFOs. However, this SR/CR distinction is purely conventional and is made with the sole pur-
pose of being able to provide different audio and control clocks 'by default'. There is always a
possibility of overriding the default connection and/or providing even more clocks by defining
further buses with different names and the same Structure.
The default CR source in REAKTOR Core is identical to SR signal-wise, runs at the au-
dio rate and has nothing to do with the Control Rate source in the REAKTOR Primary. If
desired, the Primary Control Rate can be 'imported' into the CR bus by using the Library
> Clk Bundle > Control > CR From Prim Macro.
Both SR and CR bus Bundles have identical internal Structure and theoretically can be used in
place of each other. Practically this is usually not recommended. Particularly, the conversion
between different clock rates needs to be different for audio and control signals.
Processing Model of Core
SR and CR Buses
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 91


--- Page 92 ---

The default built-in SR and CR buses are provided 'one level higher' than the top Struc-
ture of the Core Cell, thereby allowing to redefine them already within this top-level
Structure without causing a definition conflict. If such redefinition is done, the 'previ-
ous' (default) bus has to be picked up using the parent-mode scoped accessors, as usu-
ally. See ↑4.9.4, CR rate change and ↑4.9.5, SR Rate Change for the details of redefin-
ing SR/CR.
4.9.1
Connections to the Clock Buses
 
A Core Macro Library Module that needs an SR or a CR connection has by convention a Bundle
input, labelled SR or CR respectively:
The SR input of an oscillator.
The SR/CR input convention is not used for the low-level library Macros. Particularly, the z^-1 ffd
and z^-1 fbk Macros connect themselves to the SR bus, even though they do not have an SR in-
put.
If the SR or CR input is not connected, it automatically picks up the SR or CR bus. In the case
of the above oscillator, in the default unconnected state of the SR input, this input will be au-
tomatically picking up the SR bus. Should this default connection be undesired, some other
clock Bundle source needs to be manually connected to this input. This automatic connection
convention is employed for effectively all signal generating and processing Modules in the Core
Macro Library.
4.9.2
Clock Gating
 
Sometimes it is desired to turn off audio or control processing within a given part of the Struc-
ture. This can be achieved by gating the clock.
In the following Structure the audio clock is gated for a 2-pole SVF filter:
Processing Model of Core
SR and CR Buses
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 92


--- Page 93 ---

SR clock gating.
The XR Gate Macro (Library > Clk Bundle > XR Gate) on the left interrupts the SR clock as
long as the gate signal G is zero. As soon as G is turned to 1 the clock begins to run.
Upon turning from 0 to 1, the XR Gate sends a reset signal (see section ↑4.9.6, Internal Struc-
ture of Clock Buses) along the clock Bundle, causing the connected Modules to reinitialize their
internal states if necessary. Should the reset signal be undesired in this case, use an XR Freeze
Macro instead.
The "XR" stands for either "SR" or "CR". That is, the XR Macros are equally usable for both SR
and CR Bundles. Some other clock Bundle Macros are usable only for SR or only for CR Bun-
dles. Those Macros are located under Library > Clk Bundle > Audio and Library > Clk Bundle >
Control respectively.
The XR Gate Macro only gates the clock, but does not cause the outputs of the connect-
ed audio- and control-processing Macros, such as the LP output of the filter in the
above picture, to be zeroed (this is done for the CPU efficiency reasons, associated with
the event merging issues discussed in section ↑5.6.3, Routing and Merging). It is the
builder's responsibility to avoid picking up the 'frozen' output values by some other run-
ning parts of the Structure downstream.
The automatic default connection of SR/CR input is implemented only for the signal
generating and processing Modules like oscillators, filters, envelopes, LFOs, etc. The
Modules dedicated to the handling of SR/CR bus themselves (such as clock gates, divid-
ers, etc. (located in Library > Clk Bundle > Control) always need to be connected explic-
itly.
Processing Model of Core
SR and CR Buses
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 93


--- Page 94 ---

4.9.3
SR and CR redefinition
 
If a whole area of the Structure is being controlled by a gated clock, then instead of wiring up
the output of the XR Gate Macro to each of the clocked Modules, it is convenient to put all
such gated Modules into one Macro Structure and locally redefine the clock bus within this
Structure:
Redefining the SR bus.
Notice the parent-mode accessor usage at the input of the XR Gate, which ensures that
the higher-level SR bus, rather than the one defined on this level, will be picked up.
Another version of the same approach is discussed in section ↑5.2, Generation of Audio and
Other Regularly Clocked Events.
Some kind of an 'in-between' approach is to define a Scoped Bus (or a QuickBus) with a different
name and explicitly connect to this bus. Notice that there is no need for the parent-mode acces-
sor at the XR Gate's input in this case.
4.9.4
CR rate change
 
In certain advanced Structure building scenarios one control rate is insufficient. Or the default
control rate, which is equal to the audio rate, may be considered too high for the builder's pur-
poses. In this case the CR rate division may be employed to generate lower control rates. E.g.
the following Structure fragment employs the CR Div Macro (Library > Clk Bundle > Control >
CR Div) to locally redefine the CR bus to a 4 times lower rate:
Processing Model of Core
SR and CR Buses
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 94


--- Page 95 ---

Redefining the CR bus to a 4 times lower rate.
Of course, the other discussed possibilities to connect to the new CR (including explicit wiring,
QuickBuses and differently named Scoped Buses) can be used as well.
Smoothing
Converting a signal from a higher control rate to a lower control rate can be done by the XR Re-
clock Macro (Library > Clk Bundle > XR Reclock):
Reclocking control signal to a lower rate.
In principle the XR Reclock Macro can be also used for control signal upclocking or audio up- or
downclocking. Usually, however, this will create undesired artifacts that can be avoided by using
other means instead.
Conversion from a lower control rate to a higher control rate is achieved by smoothing. A linear
cross-control rate smoother is provided by the CR Lin XSmoother Macro (Library > Clk Bundle
> Control > CR Lin XSmoother):
Smoothing from a lower control rate to a higher one.
Processing Model of Core
SR and CR Buses
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 95


--- Page 96 ---

The CR Lin XSmoother Macro is designed to be used by hard-locked control rates, the ratio of
which is an integer number. E.g. in the above picture the CR/4 control rate is obtained by ap-
plying the CR Div Macro to the CR control rate. If this condition is not met, the smoother will not
work correctly.
The "(0)" input of this and other smoothers is intended to provide an initial value for the smooth-
er. If the input signal of a smoother is clocked, then according to the clocking conventions (see
sections ↑4.9.6, Internal Structure of Clock Buses, ↑5.2, Generation of Audio and Other Regularly
Clocked Events and ↑5.3, Processing of Audio and Other Regularly Clocked Events) the input sig-
nal cannot arrive during the initialization or a Structure reset. Thus, it will be not possible to use
the input signal to specify the initial state of the smoother. One way around it is to merge in a
dedicated initial value signal using a Merge Module in front of the smoother's input. However this
is a kind of hidden violation of the mentioned clocking convention. Instead, one should connect
the initialization signal to the "(0)" input of the smoother. If the input signal is not following the
clocking convention (like e.g. a signal which comes from a knob) and provides a reasonable initial
value setting for the smoother, then the "(0)" input can be left disconnected. The smoother will
use the input signal as the initial value source in this case.
Irregular Permanent Smoothing
Smoothing can also be applied to convert an irregularly clocked signal (or a signal which
comes completely sporadically, such as a stream of values from a panel knob) to remove the
steps in the signal. Such smoothing will produce a stream of values clocked at some control
rate. Depending on the specifics of the particular smoother, however, the signal events might
not be sent all the time, but only until the destination value is reached by the smoother. E.g.
in the following Structure the "Cutoff" knob's value at the Macro's input is being smoothed by a
Lin Smoother [P] Macro (Library > Control > Smoother > Lin Smoother [P]):
Permanent smoothing of an irregular control event stream.
Processing Model of Core
SR and CR Buses
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 96


--- Page 97 ---

The Library > Control > Smoother > Lin Smoother [P] Macro is not considered a CR-han-
dling Macro, since it does not modify the CR Bundle or explicitly convert from one rate
to another. For that reason it is located under Library > Control rather than Library >
Clk Bundle > Control. For the same reason it automatically connects to the CR scope
bus.
The Lin Smoother P Macro generates a permanent stream of output events at a rate defined by
CR bus ("P" for Permanent). Whenever there is a new event coming from the "Cutoff" input port
Module, the smoother generates a ramp of duration specified by the Time input (in seconds)
from the old value to the new value.
If the Time input is not connected, there is some preconfigured default. The "(0)" input has the
same function as for CR Lin XSmoother.
Irregular Automatic Smoothing
Imagine the control signal processing Structure downstream from a smoother. The processing
in this Structure may follow different conventions, such as the following:
•
The control signal processing Structure is clocked by the CR clock.
•
The control signal processing Structure is unclocked; the processing is triggered by the in-
coming control signal events.
In the latter case it might be undesirable that the smoother is generating the output events all
the time, thereby causing the control signal processing to run all the time as well. Rather, the
smoother should only generate the output events until the target value is reached and then
stop. This behavior is implemented by the Lin Smoother [A] Macro (Library > Control >
Smoother > Lin Smoother [A], "A" for Automatic), which differs from Lin Smoother [P] only in
exactly this aspect:
Automatic smoothing of an irregular control event stream.
Processing Model of Core
SR and CR Buses
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 97


--- Page 98 ---

Irregular Batch Smoothing
The automatic stop option however still requires a runtime check on every control clock in or-
der to determine whether the smoother is active or not. Such runtime check also consumes
CPU time. Therefore it is a good idea, if one has a group of several of such smoothers, to group
them together, performing one single runtime check for the entire group.
This approach is implemented by the Lin Smoothers [A] Macro (Library > Control > Smoother
> Lin Smoothers [A]):
Batch smoothing of two irregular control event streams.
Internally the Lin Smoothers [A] Macro contains a 'master' smoother (containing the master
check) and a chain of 'slave' smoothers:
The internal Structure of Lin Smoothers [A] Macro.
Processing Model of Core
SR and CR Buses
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 98


--- Page 99 ---

The slave smoothers are the ones doing the smoothing itself and can be added or removed by
the user of the Macro according to the number of signals which need to be smoothed. The "No
Event" default for the Macro inputs prevents the unused inputs from initiating a smoothing
ramp upon reset. The maximum number of slave smoothers supported by the current imple-
mentation is 32, which should be sufficient for most purposes.
Sticking too many smoothers together in this fashion will produce some small overhead, due to
the fact that the per-smoother runtime checks will be performed for all smoothers as long as at
least one of the smoothers is active.
4.9.5
SR Rate Change
 
A conversion between audio signals of different rates is done differently from control signals.
While control signals can be naively downsampled and smoothed upon upsampling, the audio
signal resampling requires special kinds filtering techniques.
In the current version of REAKTOR Core the clock rates can be only lowered, not raised.
Thus, oversampling is currently not possible. The rate conversion Macros are of course
available in both directions: downsampling (used upon entering the downsampled area)
and upsampling (used upon leaving the downsampled area).
Thus, a set of library Macros provided for the SR rate change is different from those for CR:
A locally downsampled SVF (State-Variable Filter)
The SRdiv2 Master Macro (Library > Clk Bundle > Audio > SRdiv2 Master) on the very left is
the downsampling master, which is driving the downsampling converter SRdiv2 In on the left
and the upsampling converter SRdiv2 Out on the right. Thus the filter in between is running at
halved sampling rate. You can drive multiple SRdiv2 In and SRdiv2 Out converters with the
same master.
Processing Model of Core
SR and CR Buses
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 99


--- Page 100 ---

Often it might be reasonable to put the entire downsampled area inside a dedicated Macro. In
this case it is useful to locally redefine the SR bus to the downclocked one using the same trick
as it was explained for the CR bus in ↑4.9.4, CR rate change. Note that you still need to explicitly
resample all incoming and outgoing audio signals of the downsampled area by using SRdiv2 In
and SRdiv2 Out Macros.
4.9.6
Internal Structure of Clock Buses
 
A clock bus is a Bundle containing three different fibers named "C", "R" and "Reset". For the
convenience of the builders the Macro library contains preconfigured Bundle Pack and Unpack
Modules for the SR and CR buses under Library > Clk Bundle > Audio > XR Pack and XR Un-
pack:
Preconfigured Pack and Unpack Modules for the SR/CR Bundles from the library
The details of each of the fibers are described below. The examples of the low-level usage of
the clock buses can be found in sections ↑5.2, Generation of Audio and Other Regularly
Clocked Events and ↑5.3, Processing of Audio and Other Regularly Clocked Events.
"C" Fiber
This is the clock fiber which sends regular events at the clock rate. The audio processing Mac-
ros are supposed to send the output audio events only in response to the clock events. Same
holds for regularly clocked control events.
The convention requires that no event is sent on the C fiber during the initialization.
This particularly means that the audio signal outputs and clocked control outputs of
Core Macros are not sending during the initialization.
The value of the C fiber is unspecified and should not be relied upon.
Processing Model of Core
SR and CR Buses
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 100


--- Page 101 ---

"R" Fiber
This fiber transmits the clock rate in Hz.
The convention requires that the R event is sent during the initialization. Afterwards it is
sent as needed.
The reason for this convention is to simplify the event processing in the use cases of the R fiber.
Since the R fiber is guaranteed to send the initialization event, it can be safely used as a divisor
in the computation of oscillator increment steps, normalized filter cutoffs, and so on.
The events on the R fiber may cause additional computation overhead in the consumer Struc-
tures, as they are reconfiguring themselves to a new rate, and should not be sent indiscriminately,
but rather only when the rate changes or is likely to change (filtering out the duplicate values sent
on this fiber is probably a little excessive, while sending events here at a regular rate is a highly
questionable practice).
"Reset" Fiber
This fiber transmits a zero-value reset event. The consumers of the SR Bundle are supposed to
reset their state (if necessary) in response to this event. E.g. a filter should reset its state,
while a free-running oscillator does not have to do anything in response to this event.
The convention requires that the Reset event is sent during the initialization. Afterwards
it is sent as needed.
The convention requires that the Reset event always has a zero value.
The convention specifies the Reset event semantics as 'starting again without the past'.
E.g. a Reset event can be sent upon resuming a paused clock to cause the Structures
(such as e.g. filters) to reinitialize their states.
Processing Model of Core
SR and CR Buses
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 101


--- Page 102 ---

The reason for sending the Reset event during the initialization is to simplify the initialization of
the Structures, which otherwise might need to take special measures to make sure that the same
initialization steps are performed during the initialization and during further resets. The reason for
the zero value of the Reset event is that a typical response to the Reset event is to zero the states,
therefore the Reset event can be directly stored to the state memory of the respective Structures.
4.10
Feedback Connections
 
4.10.1
Automatic Resolution
 
REAKTOR Core allows the usage of the feedback loops in the Structures, provided each feed-
back loop contains at least one scalar (float or int) wire. The loop will be handled by automati-
cally placing an implicit one-sample audio delay somewhere within the loop,
'Audio' means that this implicitly inserted delay will be clocked by the SR.C clock obtained from
the current scope. The delay also responds to SR.Reset by zeroing its memory.
It is not guaranteed that REAKTOR Core will use at maximum one implicit one-sample
delay per detected feedback loop. In some cases it is possible that more delays will be
inserted. For exact control over the feedback loop resolution, one needs to use z^-1 fbk
Macros explicitly (see section ↑4.10.2, Manual Resolution).
REAKTOR Core highlights the feedback loop visually by turning the connection color to orange:
A highlighted feedback loop.
If the loop does not contain any scalar wires then it is an error, which is highlighted in red:
Processing Model of Core
Feedback Connections
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 102


--- Page 103 ---

A purely non-scalar feedback loop.
Equally, if an SR bus definition is contained in or depends on a feedback loop, such loop is an
error, even if it does contain scalar wires:
SR bus dependent on the feedback loop
The reason for this is that the implicit audio delay used for the feedback loop resolution needs
access to SR.C and SR.Reset, which creates another feedback loop after the resolution of the first
one. See section ↑4.10.4, Resolution Mechanism for the details of the delay's Structure.
4.10.2
Manual Resolution
 
If exact control over the feedback loop resolution is needed, a z^-1 fbk Macro (Library > Mem-
ory > z^-1 fbk) has to be used. In this case the compiler does not highlight the loop anymore:
The use of the z^-1 fbk Macro to explicitly resolve the feedback loop.
Processing Model of Core
Feedback Connections
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 103


--- Page 104 ---

The z^-1 fbk Macro implements the same one-sample delay Structure which is used by the au-
tomatic resolution. Differently from the automatic resolution, by using this Macro the builder
can exactly specify the position of the one-sample delay.
The z^-1 ffd Macro (Library > Memory > z^-1 ffd) is not intended and cannot be used
for the feedback resolution. Its intention is implementation of feedforward 1-sample au-
dio delays.
Neither of the above two Macros is supposed to be used for other purposes than audio
rate 1-sample delays. For delaying other kinds of events by one tick use the Latch[-1]
and Event[-1] Macros.
4.10.3
Nonsolid Macros and Feedback Loops
 
The Solid property setting of the Macro is affecting how the Macro is treated in respect to the
feedback loops.
•
Solid Macros 'cannot be entered' by feedback loops. This means that, regardless of the in-
ternal contents of the Macro, a feedback loop around this Macro is always a feedback
loop. A Macro is treated as if it didn't have any internal Structure and was just a single
solid block:
Processing Model of Core
Feedback Connections
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 104


--- Page 105 ---

•
The boundaries of nonsolid Macros are transparent to the feedback loops. If there is no
unidirectional connection from an input to an output internally inside a nonsolid Macro,
there will be no loop:
In particular, the z^-1 fbk Macro needs to be nonsolid in order to be able to resolve the
feedback.
4.10.4
Resolution Mechanism
 
Internally the z^-1 fbk Macro loops like follows:
The internal Structure of the z^-1 fbk Macro.
Processing Model of Core
Feedback Connections
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 105


--- Page 106 ---

The Latch and the Write Modules on the left are responsible for handling the SR.Reset, where
the "(0)" input can be used to specify the value to reset to. The DN Cancel Module takes care
of denormals (see section ↑5.5, Denormals and Other Bad Numbers). The essential part of the
Structure is based on the remaining two Modules:
The essential part of the z^-1 fbk Macro's internal Structure.
Since the z^-1 fbk Macro is nonsolid, the following two Structures are equivalent:
An equivalent expansion of the z^-1 fbk Macro (the nonessential parts of the z^-1 fbk's internal Structure are omitted).
So, formally from the compiler's perspective, there is no feedback loop at all (and thus no
highlighting either).
Processing Model of Core
Feedback Connections
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 106

