--- Page 40 ---

3
Additional Connectivity Features
 
3.1
QuickConsts
 
QuickConsts are a lightweight alternative to Const Modules. To create a QuickConst do the fol-
lowing:
1.
Right-click on a scalar input and select the Connect to New QuickConst.
2.
A new QuickConst is created (if the input is already connected, the old connection will be
deleted).
Additional Connectivity Features
QuickConsts
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 40


--- Page 41 ---

3.
The value and the type of the QuickConst can be adjusted in the QuickConst's Properties.
The Properties show up whenever the QuickConst is selected.
1.
To select a QuickConst, simply click on the QuickConst.
2.
To delete a QuickConst, you can either select it and press [Del] or [Backspace], right-click
on it and select Delete Connection, or click-and-drag from the input port into the Struc-
ture background.
Functionally the QuickConsts are fully identical to the ordinary Const Modules. However,
unlike the Const Modules, they cannot be copied and pasted. Additionally, multiple con-
nections to a QuickConst are not possible.
3.2
QuickBuses
 
QuickBuses are an 'invisible' alternative to the wires and can be used to reduce the connection
clutter within a Structure.
QuickBuses do not support cross-Structure connectivity. For cross-Structure connectivity
use Scoped Buses (see section ↑3.3, Scoped Buses).
To create a QuickBus, do the following.
Additional Connectivity Features
QuickBuses
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 41


--- Page 42 ---

1.
Right-click on an input or an output and select Connect to New QuickBus.
2.
A new QuickBus with a default name (in this case "QBus") is created and the correspond-
ing QuickBus accessor is connected to the port.
3.
The name and the type of the QuickBus can be adjusted in the QuickBus's Properties.
Additional Connectivity Features
QuickBuses
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 42


--- Page 43 ---

The QuickBus itself is not visible in the Structure. What is connected to the port is not
the QuickBus itself, but the QuickBus accessor. Selecting an accessor (by clicking on it)
switches the Properties to the associated QuickBus.
QuickBuses are supported for all port types, not just the scalar ports as QuickConsts.
In order for the QuickBus to establish a connection between an output port and an input port it
has to be connected to both an input and an output. To connect a port to the existing Quick-
Bus, do the following.
1.
Right-click on the port and select the respective QuickBus's name in the Con-
nect to QuickBus submenu.
2.
Another accessor is created, thereby establishing a connection between the output and
the input. Both accessors are referring to the same QuickBus object and thus are connect-
ed to each other.
Additional Connectivity Features
QuickBuses
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 43


--- Page 44 ---

The same QuickBus can be used to connect several inputs to one output. Simply right-click on
an input and select the QuickBus from the Connect to QuickBus submenu to establish an ad-
ditional connection to the same QuickBus:
Two connections established via a single QuickBus.
While it is possible to connect several inputs to a single QuickBus, at most one output can be
connected to a given QuickBus at any given time. An attempt to connect a second output to
the same QuickBus will disconnect the previously connected output from the QuickBus.
A QuickBus that is not connected to an output will be 'default-connected' according to the
conventions explained in section ↑2.4.5, Connection Defaults. An input connected to a Quick-
Bus accessor is formally a connected input (regardless of whether there is an output connected
to the QuickBus or not), thus the default connection mechanism for this input is not active in
this case. The explicit usage of QuickBuses which are not connected to an output is not advis-
able in finished Structures.
QuickBuses can have the same name within the Structure, even though giving each
QuickBus a unique name is recommended. Duplicate names are automatically extended
with extra indices "(1)", "(2)", "(3)" etc. These extra indices are not a part of the name
and are merely a visual display feature, allowing you to distinguish between identically
named QuickBuses. In principle these indices are intended to be used exclusively in
temporary situations, such as after a QuickBus name collision upon copying and past-
ing. QuickBus name collisions in finished Structures are not recommended.
Additional Connectivity Features
QuickBuses
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 44


--- Page 45 ---

QuickBus connections can only be used between ports within the same Structure. Therefore,
identically named QuickBuses from different Structures (if existing) represent completely differ-
ent QuickBus objects and do not generate a collision either. In the terminology of programming
languages, the QuickBus namespaces are per-Structure.
A QuickBus exists as long as there is at least one accessor associated with the QuickBus. The
accessors are deleted in the same way as other connections and QuickConsts.
Disconnecting accessors by clicking and dragging to the background works only for the accessors
at the input ports.
3.3
Scoped Buses
 
Scoped Buses allow invisible connections across several Structure layers. Unlike QuickBuses,
Scoped Bus connections are asymmetric in the following sense:
•
A QuickBus connection is established between two (lightweight) accessors.
•
A Scoped Bus connection is established between a single (heavy-weight) definition point
and one or multiple (lightweight) accessors.
The accessors connected to a definition point must be located within the definition scope. The
definition scope includes the same Structure as the definition point and the Macros contained
within that Structure (including the Macros contained within those Macros, etc.).
More strictly speaking the definition scope is the same solid area and all nested ones. See section
↑3.3.6, Solid Areas for more details.
3.3.1
Definitions
 
The definition points are provided in the form of built-in Modules and come in two different
flavors:
Additional Connectivity Features
Scoped Buses
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 45


--- Page 46 ---

•
Distribution Scoped Buses: The definition point acts as the output side of a connection (the
signal flows from the definition point to the accessors). The input side of a connection is
represented by a scoped pickup accessor. There can be multiple scoped pickup accessors
connected to a single distribution bus. This is the most useful flavor of the two.
•
Reception Scoped Buses: The definition point acts as the input side of a connection (the
signal flows from the accessor to the definition point). The output side of a connection is
represented by a scoped send accessor. The current implementation of REAKTOR Core al-
lows only single-reception Scoped Buses, which do not support more than one connected
scoped send accessor.
The connection classes supported by Scoped Buses in the current implementation of REAK-
TOR Core are scalar and Bundle. The Built-In Module > Scoped Bus menu allows you to create
the definition points of distribution and reception flavors within these connection classes.
Scoped Bus submenu for creating distribution and reception definition Modules
A distribution definition Module has an input which is supposed to be connected to a signal
source. A reception definition Module has an output which is supposed to be connected to a
signal's destination:
Additional Connectivity Features
Scoped Buses
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 46


--- Page 47 ---

Newly created scalar scoped distribution (left) and reception (right) Modules.
A newly created definition does not have a name and thus does not define a Scoped
Bus. In order to define a Scoped Bus, the definition must be given a nonempty name in
its Properties.
Both the distribution definition and reception definition Modules have a connection status in-
dicator that turns green when one or more accessors are connected to this definition. It turns
red in case of a definition conflict (see section ↑3.4.3, Definition Conflicts and Pickup Errors.).
A distribution definition of a Scoped Bus named "Bus" with a green ('connected') connection status indicator.
3.3.2
Simple Scoped Access
 
In order to make a scoped connection to a definition point an accessor needs to be created
within the definition scope. For distribution buses a scoped pickup accessor (or simply 'pick-
up') needs to be created, for reception buses a scoped send accessor (or simply 'send') needs
to be created.
To create a scoped pickup accessor do the following:
Additional Connectivity Features
Scoped Buses
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 47


--- Page 48 ---

1.
Right-click on an input of the scalar or Bundle type and select Pickup Distribution Bus….
2.
A text entry field appears next to the input. Enter a nonempty name for the scoped pickup
accessor.
3.
Press [Enter] to create a pickup with the name you just typed in. If you want to abort the
creation of the pickup, press [Esc].
Additional Connectivity Features
Scoped Buses
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 48


--- Page 49 ---

Scoped sends are created in the same way, except that you have to right-click on an output
port:
Creation of a scoped send.
The scoped accessors can be distinguished from QuickBus accessors by the 'broken' arrow next to
them:
A scoped accessor is looking for an identically named definition, within the scope of which the
accessor is located. The search is started in the same Structure (more correctly, in the same
solid area, see section ↑3.3.6, Solid Areas) where the accessor is located. If an identically
named definition is found, the accessor connects to that definition. If such definition is not
found, the accessor looks in the parent Structure (parent solid area), and so on. If the defini-
tion is not found at the topmost (Core Cell) level, the accessor fails to connect.
The following example demonstrates a pickup named "Cutoff" connecting to the identically-
named definition one level higher:
Additional Connectivity Features
Scoped Buses
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 49


--- Page 50 ---

A scoped connection.
A scoped accessor can be selected by a single left-click. Differently from QuickBuses, accessor
selection does not provide access to the bus's Properties.
A scoped accessor can be renamed by double-clicking it. Renaming is confirmed by pressing
[Enter] or aborted by pressing [Esc], just like when giving an accessor a name upon creation.
An accessor cannot have an empty name. If renamed to an empty name, the accessor is delet-
ed. Otherwise, the deletion of scoped accessors can be done in the same way as for other con-
nections and QuickBus accessors.
Differently from QuickBus accessors, which always stay connected to the same Quick-
Bus and where the rename function renames the bus itself and not the accessors, the
name of a scoped definition or of an accessor applies only to this specific definition or
the accessor. If a scoped accessor or definition is renamed, it gets reconnected to a dif-
ferent definition or to a different set of accessors according to the new name.
3.3.3
Scoped Connection Errors
 
The scoped name lookup completely disregards the definition flavor and type (in programming
language terminology, all Scoped Buses share the same namespace). If a scoped accessor
finds a definition with a matching name that it cannot connect to (because the flavor and/or
type are incompatible), it will fail to connect. Equally a scoped accessor fails to connect if it
does not find a definition of a matching name at all. Such accessors are highlighted in red:
Additional Connectivity Features
Scoped Buses
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 50


--- Page 51 ---

A scoped pickup accessor that fails to connect.
Aside from highlighting the accessor itself, the Core compiler highlights the parent Macros
containing this accessor. The highlighting of Macros goes up in the Macro hierarchy as far as
the 'error locality area' reaches.
The error locality area is (approximately) defined as the area that can affect the accessor error.
E.g. if an accessor does not find a definition of a matching name, the parent Macros will be
highlighted all the way up to the Core Cell's Structure. If, on the other hand, the error is due to
a type or flavor incompatibility, the highlighting will go up only to the level of the respective
bus definition.
3.3.4
Name Collisions and Definition Overriding
 
Two identically named definitions within the same Structure produce a name collision, regard-
less of their types and flavors. The connection status indicators of the conflicting definitions
turn red:
Additional Connectivity Features
Scoped Buses
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 51


--- Page 52 ---

Two conflicting definitions.
It is however possible to have identically named definitions if one Structure is a (direct or indi-
rect) parent of the other. In this case the lower-level (the 'more nested') definition overrides the
higher level one. Overriding means that from this Structure on, the new definition will be used
by the respectively named accessors.
The overriding effect is naturally following from the described earlier lookup process for a name-
matched definition from the accessor. Clearly, the lookup process will find the 'most nested' defi-
nition above (or at) the accessor's level.
Identically named definitions in 'unrelated' Structures (that is, when neither of two different
Structures is the parent of the other) do not produce a conflict, as their name visibility scopes
do not overlap.
3.3.5
Parent Mode Accessors
 
Sometimes, when overriding a definition, the new definition needs to be specified 'in terms' of
the old definition. This makes it necessary (or at least highly desireable) to be able to access
the old definition within the Structure of the new definition. This can be done by using a pa-
rent-mode accessor.
The accessor parent mode is specified by typing two dots in front of the accessor's name (when
creating or renaming the accessor). The parent mode causes the accessor to ignore the defini-
tion within the same Structure and start the lookup for the matching definition one level high-
er, from the parent Structure. So, in case of a definition override, a parent-mode accessor will
connect to the old rather than the new definition.
Additional Connectivity Features
Scoped Buses
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 52


--- Page 53 ---

An example of parent-mode accessor usage
In the above example there is an (overriding) redefinition of the "Cutoff" Scoped Bus to a
halved value. If the scoped pickup accessor on the left had not been set to parent mode, it
would have connected to the new definition, creating a feedback loop (see section ↑4.10,
Feedback Connections for a discussion of feedback loops):
An example of a logical error caused by the missing parent mode of the accessor.
3.3.6
Solid Areas
 
If a Scoped Bus is defined inside a Macro, the definition scope does not include the Macro's
parent Structure. This makes it impossible to create a Macro the purpose of which is to define
a Scoped Bus. This restriction can be lifted by turning off the Solid property of the Macro. In
this case the Scoped Bus definitions contained directly within the Macro become visible on the
parent level:
Using a non-solid Macro to define Scoped Buses for the parent Structure.
Additional Connectivity Features
Scoped Buses
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 53


--- Page 54 ---

The Macro solidity also affects the resolution of the feedback loops (see section
↑4.10.3, Nonsolid Macros and Feedback Loops).
Whether using the non-solid Macros to define Scoped Buses within the parent Macro's context
is good practice or not is questionable, since in this case the definitions are not visible at the
top Structure of the definition scope. In any case this possibility should be used with care.
The description of the Scoped Bus functionality up to this point in the manual is ap-
proximate. It is only correct assuming that all Macros are solid. This assumption was
done for simplifying the material presentation. A precise description of the Scoped Bus
functionality follows below.
A Precise Description of Scoped Bus Rules
The Scoped Bus mechanism of REAKTOR Core works in terms of the solid areas rather than in
terms of Structures. A solid area is the area bounded by the boundaries of solid Macros. If a
Macro is solid and so are all directly nested Macros, then the Macro's Structure constitutes a
solid area. If all Macros in a Core Cell are solid, then there is no difference between Structures
and solid areas. If in such a Core Cell one Macro is made non-solid, then the solid boundary
between this Macro and its parent Structure disappears, meaning that the parent Structure
and the Macro's Structure now constitute one solid area, etc.
Consequently, the following applies:
•
The scope of a definition starts at the solid area of the definition and extends to all nested
solid areas, unless overridden by another definition in a nested solid area.
•
Two identically named definitions within one solid area produce a conflict.
•
A parent-mode accessor looks up for the matching definition starting from the parent solid
area, rather than the parent solid Structure.
Additional Connectivity Features
Scoped Buses
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 54


--- Page 55 ---

3.3.7
Name Normalization and Escaping
 
Normalization
Since scoped connections are established by name, it is very important that the names are vis-
ually distinguishable in the Structure. For that reason REAKTOR Core automatically collapses
all whitespace within the names:
•
Whitespaces in the middle of a name are collapsed to a single space.
•
Whitespaces at the beginning and at the end of a name are eliminated completely.
This process is referred to as normalization.
Escaping
The dot symbol has a special meaning in the scoped accessors. It is used to specify the acces-
sor parent mode. It is also used as a fiber separator in the Bundle subfiber pickup accessors
(see section ↑3.4.4, Scoped Bus Subfiber Pickups). At the same time it is still possible to de-
fine a Scoped Bus with one or more dots within its name. In order to be able to access such
definition the accessor must be able to specify that a certain dot should not be treated as a
special syntactical element (parent mode specifier or fiber separator), but an ordinary dot. This
possibility is implemented in the form of the so called escaping.
In order to specify that a certain dot in the accessor name is an ordinary dot, the dot must be
prefixed by a backslash.
The backslash is referred to as the escape character.
The backslash thereby also obtains a special syntactical meaning and thus needs to be escaped
itself if an ordinary backslash character is being meant.
Additional Connectivity Features
Scoped Buses
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 55


--- Page 56 ---

Dot escaping in an accessor.
In the above case the Scoped Bus name ("B.u.s.") contains three dots. In the accessor each of
these dots needs to be prefixed by a backslash.
Escaping is only applied to accessors, not to definitions.
If some special symbol within an accessor name is used at an inappropriate position (e.g. three
dots are used in a row at the beginning of an accessor), then REAKTOR Core will not 'approve' it
as a special symbol and will automatically escape it, explicitly highlighting its non-special mean-
ing.
3.4
Bundles
 
Bundles are a connection type, in which each 'cable' has multiple wires internally. These inter-
nal wires are referred to as the Bundle fibers.
3.4.1
Bundle Pack
 
In order to put several fibers into one Bundle use a Built-In Module > Bundle > Pack:
Additional Connectivity Features
Bundles
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 56


--- Page 57 ---

A newly created Bundle Pack Module.
A newly created Bundle Pack Module has no inputs and one Bundle output. Having no inputs
means that the outgoing Bundle has no fibers. In order to add fibers to the Bundle, navigate
into the internal Structure of the Pack Module by double-clicking on it, in the same way as it is
done with Macros. The Pack Module's internal Structure will show up:
The empty internal Structure of a newly created Pack Module.
The only editable part of the Pack Module's internal Structure is the input area on the left. The
inputs correspond to the Bundle fibers and are referred to as fiber definitions. Currently, only
scalar and Bundle fiber definitions are supported:
Additional Connectivity Features
Bundles
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 57


--- Page 58 ---

The Pack Module's input area context menu.
The fiber definitions of Bundle type allow to nest Bundles.
The fiber definitions created in the Pack Module's internal Structure show up as inputs on the
outside of the Module:
Fiber definitions and the corresponding inputs of the Pack Module.
Each fiber definition has to be given a name. Definitions with empty names cannot be
picked up on the other side of the Bundle.
Additional Connectivity Features
Bundles
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 58


--- Page 59 ---

Similarly to the Scoped Bus names, the fiber names are automatically normalized.
Most commonly the output of the Pack Module is connected to:
•
a Macro output port from the inside of a Macro (if the Pack Module is contained within a
Macro and the Macro output interface is employing a Bundle), or
•
a Macro input from the outside of a Macro, or
•
a scoped distribution definition.
3.4.2
Bundle Unpack
 
In order to access individual fibers within a Bundle use Built-In Modules > Bundle > Unpack:
A newly created Bundle Unpack Module
A newly created Bundle Unpack Module has a Bundle input and no outputs. The Bundle input
is supposed to be connected to the Bundle, the fibers of which need to be accessed. The out-
puts of the Unpack Module correspond to the fibers which need to be accessed and are creat-
ed as outputs in the Unpack Module's internal Structure. They are referred to as fiber pickups.
Fiber pickups and the corresponding outputs of the Unpack Module.
Additional Connectivity Features
Bundles
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 59


--- Page 60 ---

The fiber pickups need to be given names identical to the names of the fibers that are
being picked up. They also need to have a compatible type.
It is not necessary to pick up all the fibers of the Bundle in the Unpack Module. Only a subset of
the fibers may be picked up. E.g. in the above example the "Also a Fiber" fiber is not being picked
up. The pickups do not have to be arranged in the same order as definitions either.
3.4.3
Definition Conflicts and Pickup Errors
 
Definition Conflicts
The fibers within a Bundle are getting distinguished by their name. Thus, a Bundle should not
have two identically named fibers. If it does, then these fibers generate a conflict error:
A definition conflict created by two identically named fibers.
A conflicting definition does not generate a fiber in the Bundle.
More precisely, all conflicting definitions of the same name generate a phantom fiber in
the Bundle. Phantom fibers cannot be picked up, but are participating in Bundle merg-
ing (see section ↑3.4.5, Bundle Merging) and splitting (see section ↑3.4.6, Bundle
Splitting).
Definitions with empty names are considered void and do not conflict with each other.
Additional Connectivity Features
Bundles
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 60


--- Page 61 ---

Pickup Errors
An attempt to pick up a missing fiber, a phantom fiber or an incompatible fiber will generate a
pickup error:
Pickup errors generated by missing and incompatible fibers.
The above picture shows two errors:
•
The error in the pickup "B" is due to the type incompatibility (since the fiber "B" is of
Bundle type, while the pickup is scalar).
•
The error in the pickup "C" is due to the missing fiber (since the fiber "C" is not present in
the incoming Bundle).
Pickup errors cause the Bundle wire to be highlighted in red all the way up to the definitions.
This is done for use cases such as connecting together two library Macros by a Bundle wire. If
the Bundle output of one Macro is incompatible to the Bundle input of the other Macro, the
wire between the Macros will be highlighted in red. The wire highlighting also helps tracing the
erroneous connection all the way between the definitions and the pickups in both directions.
This highlighting approach follows the same idea of the error locality discussed in section ↑3.3.3,
Scoped Connection Errors.
Additional Connectivity Features
Bundles
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 61


--- Page 62 ---

3.4.4
Scoped Bus Subfiber Pickups
 
As a convenience feature, when accessing a Bundle Scoped Bus, the scoped pickup accessor
can access individual fibers of a Bundle. To do this, simply type the fiber name after the bus
name, separated by a dot in between:
Scoped subfiber pickup.
In case of nested Bundles, subfiber pickups can be chained within one scoped pickup:
Scoped nested subfiber pickup.
There is no corresponding feature for scoped send accessors.
3.4.5
Bundle Merging
 
As a means of Bundle manipulation, two Bundles can be merged together into a single Bundle
by the Built-In Module > Bundle > Merge:
Additional Connectivity Features
Bundles
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 62


--- Page 63 ---

Merging two Bundles into a single one.
The merged Bundles should not have identically named fibers, otherwise a merge conflict will
occur. The conflicting name is turned into a phantom fiber in the output Bundle and cannot be
picked up:
A Bundle merge conflict.
A phantom fiber can generate further merge conflicts downstream if merged with identically
named fibers.
Override Merging
By selecting an overriding input in the Bundle Merge's Properties the Bundle Merge Module
can be switched into override mode:
Additional Connectivity Features
Bundles
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 63


--- Page 64 ---

An override mode Merge.
This causes the fibers at the overriding input to take precedence over the fibers of the other
input in case of a name conflict.
The overriding mode is also useful as a means to provide default definitions for optional Bun-
dle fibers in a library or framework Macro:
Using the override mode to provide defaults for optional fibers.
In the above example the incoming Bundle is expected to contain certain fibers, among which
the "A" fiber is optional. If the "A" fiber is not present in the incoming Bundle, a default scalar
fiber of zero value is inserted into the Bundle before it goes further into the "Process" Macro.
In the 'providing the defaults' use case the main Bundle has to go into the overriding
input of the Merge Module, while the defaults should be connected to the other ('lower
priority') input.
Additional Connectivity Features
Bundles
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 64


--- Page 65 ---

3.4.6
Bundle Splitting
 
The reverse of Bundle merging is Bundle splitting, done by Built-In Module > Bundle > Split:
A Bundle Split Module.
The Bundle that needs to be split should be connected to the lower input of the Split Module.
The upper input of the Split Module is the template input. It controls the routing of the split
fibers. The routing control is purely name-based. The fibers in the lower input for which there
is an identically-named fiber in the template are routed to the upper output. The remaining fi-
bers are routed to the lower output.
One can explicitly 'route off' certain fibers from a Bundle by connecting a 'dummy' Pack Mod-
ule to the template input:
'Routing off' of fibers "A" and "B" from the Bundle.
Another use case is to remove the fibers that have been 'temporarily' merged into the Bundle:
Removing the temporarily merged 'default fibers'.
Additional Connectivity Features
Bundles
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 65


--- Page 66 ---

In the above example it is important that the Split Module is using the original Bundle
as the template. A possible alternative implementation using the defaults as the tem-
plate will not work correctly if the default fibers are already present in the input Bundle
of the Macro, because these fibers are routed off by the Split:
Additional Connectivity Features
Bundles
 
REAKTOR 6 - - 66

