--- Page 144 ---

8
Arrays
 
8.1
Introduction to Arrays
 
Let’s imagine you want to build an audio-signal selector module, which, depending on the 
value at the control input, picks up the signal from one of four audio-signal inputs:
One approach would be to use Router modules, but there is also another possibility—we 
can use another feature of Reaktor Core – arrays.
A one-dimensional array is an ordered collection of data items of the same type which can 
be addressed by their rank in this order or index. For example, here we have a group of 5 
float numbers:
▪
5.2 16.1 -24.0 11.9 -0.5
In Reaktor Core the array element indices are zero-based, which means that the first ele­
ment of the array has an index of 0. Therefore, the element with an index of 0 is 5.2, an 
index of 1 gives us 16.1, and indices of 2, 3, and 4 address –24.0, 11.9, and 0.5, re­
spectively.
Here is a representation of this array using a table:
Index
Value
0
5.2
1
16.1
2
-24.0
Arrays
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 144


--- Page 145 ---

Index
Value
3
11.9
4
0.5
Arrays are created in Reaktor Core using Array modules (Built‑In Module > Memory > Ar
ray):
An Array module has a single output which is of Array OBC type. The size of the array 
(number of elements) and the type of data kept in the elements of the array are specified 
in the Array module’s properties:
For example, for the above table of 5 elements we will need to specify the float data type 
and the size of 5.
Please note that because array indices in Reaktor Core are zero-based, the index range for an 
array of size 5 would be 0 to 4 (you can also see it in the table above).
Array OBC signals corresponding to different item data types are, of course, not compatible.
To address an array element you need to specify an index, which you can do using an In­
dex module (Built‑In In Module > Memory > Index):
Arrays
Introduction to Arrays
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 145


--- Page 146 ---

The master OBC input (bottom) of the Index module should be connected to the slave out­
put of an array module. The master input connection type should match the array type, the 
former can be specified in the properties of the Index module:
And now the connection:
The upper input of the Index module is always integer type and accepts the index value. 
Here we are addressing the array element with the index of 1:
Notice that the constant module has also been set to integer mode (you can tell that by 
the look of the output port). This is not necessary, because automatic conversion to integer 
would have been performed anyway; it just looks better.
Arrays
Introduction to Arrays
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 146


--- Page 147 ---

Alternatively we could have used a QuickConst:
The output of the Index module is a Latch OBC type, which means that you can connect 
Read and Write modules (or even several of them) to that output. Of course, you need to 
take care that the Read and Write modules are set to the same data type as the data type 
of the Array and Index modules.
Here the array element with index of 1 will be initialized to 16.1:
If an out-of-range index is sent to the Index module, the result of accessing the array is unde­
fined. The structure will not crash, but it’s unspecified which array element will be accessed 
in this case or whether the access operation will take place at all. If you’re unsure of the range 
of incoming index values, you should clip the input value range using Routers or macro mod­
ules from the library.
8.2
Building an Audio Signal Selector
 
Now let’s return to building the audio signal selector module:
Here is an empty internal structure for this module:
Arrays
Building an Audio Signal Selector
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 147


--- Page 148 ---

We are going to use an array of 4 float elements for storing our audio signals:
Here are the properties of the array module:
To write the input values into the array we will use the standard macro Write [] (Expert 
Macro > Memory > Write []):
Arrays
Building an Audio Signal Selector
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 148


--- Page 149 ---

This macro internally has an Index module and a Write module, performing writing into the 
array element with a specified index:
The upper input, of course, receives the value to be written. The [] input receives the in­
dex at which the write operation should take place. The M input receives the OBC connec­
tion to a default precision float array, and the S output is a thru connection, similar to oth­
er OBC modules like Read and Write.
The M input and the S output are another type of macro port, which differs from the ones 
we have been using up to now. These ports can be inserted by selecting the Latch entry 
from the port insertion menu (the third type is the BoolCtl macro port type):
Latch ports can be used for latch OBC connections (between Reads and Writes) as well as 
for array OBC connections. How they are used is controlled in the port’s properties:
Arrays
Building an Audio Signal Selector
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 149


--- Page 150 ---

Setting the connection type to Latch or Array defines the OBC connection type between 
latch OBC and array OBC, respectively. For the Write [] macro ports this has obviously 
been set to Array type.
The module with two parallel horizontal lines is the R/W Order module (Built‑In Module >
Memory > R/W Order):
It does nothing except let the connection at its master (bottom) input through to its slave 
output. The upper input has absolutely no effect; however, because there is a connection 
at this input, it will affect the processing order of the modules. Therefore, everything con­
nected to the S output of the macro will be processed after the Write module, which would 
not be the case were the R/W Order module missing from the structure.
In the absence of the R/W Order module, the functionality of the Write [] macro would not be 
very reliable or intuitive, because the user expects everything connected to the S output of the 
Write [] macro to be processed after this macro. Generally, such problem arises only with OBC 
connections, and in those cases, you need to take care to put R/W Order modules into the 
macros that you design where necessary.
Arrays
Building an Audio Signal Selector
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 150


--- Page 151 ---

Like OBC ports, the R/W Order module has a Connection Type property. For this module 
the Connection Type property controls only the type of the M and S ports; the sidechain 
input is always in latch mode. See the description of R/W Order in the module reference 
section for details. Now let’s build the circuitry for writing the input signals into the array:
The four Write [] modules will take care of storing the incoming audio values into the ar­
ray. We now need some circuitry to read one of the 4 values. We suggest using Read [] 
macro (Expert Macro > Memory > Read []):
Arrays
Building an Audio Signal Selector
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 151


--- Page 152 ---

This macro reads from an array element whose index is specified at the integer input in 
the middle. The top input is the clock input for the read operation – it will send the read 
value to the upper output of the module in response to an incoming event. The ports at the 
bottom are, of course, the master and slave array connections.
Now to what do we connect the master input? Obviously we cannot connect it directly to 
the array module, because we need the read operation to be performed after all write oper­
ations (otherwise, there might be an effective one-sample delay, or there might not be, all-
in-all not very reliable). We also cannot connect it to any of the Write [] modules, because 
that wouldn’t solve our problem. We suggest that, rather than connecting the Write [] mod­
ules to the array module in a fan pattern, you connect them serially; then connect the 
Read [] module to the output of the last Write [] module.
Arrays
Building an Audio Signal Selector
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 152


--- Page 153 ---

Now, what do we connect to the index input of the Read [] module? Because we want our 
selection value to be in the range 1 to 4, we need to subtract 1 from the Sel input value. 
Notice that we perform integer subtraction (and because Sel is just a control input we 
don’t really need a modulation macro here):
The last step is to clock the read module by the sampling-rate clock (because we are 
building an audio selector):
In general, you should also take care to clip the Sel input value to the correct range, but 
for simplicity, we did not do that here.
Here is the suggested test structure (the macro has been put into an audio core cell):
Arrays
Building an Audio Signal Selector
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 153


--- Page 154 ---

The Sel knob is set to switch between 4 values from 1 to 4.
Now switch to the panel and look at different waveforms corresponding to the knob set­
ting:
Arrays
Building an Audio Signal Selector
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 154


--- Page 155 ---

8.3
Building a Delay
 
Now that we have some experience with arrays, let’s build a simple audio-delay macro. 
The module will look like this:
Or even better, like this (to align the output port with the top input port, we need to go 
into the macro and change its Port Alignment property to top):
The T input expects the delay time in seconds.
If you take a look at an analog tape delay device, you’ll see a tape loop combined with re­
cord and playback heads. Strictly speaking there’s also an erase head, but for simplicity 
we can imagine that the record head does both the jobs of erasing and recording.
Arrays
Building a Delay
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 155


--- Page 156 ---

If we want to simulate this in a digital form, we need some kind of digital tape loop. Be­
cause of the discrete nature of digital, the digital tape loop will hold a finite number of 
audio samples, and these samples will be recorded and read at the audio sampling rate:
A natural choice for a digital tape loop would be an array, the size of the array being equal 
to the number of samples recorded in the whole loop.
In an analog tape delay, the delay time depends on the distance between the record and 
playback heads and on the tape speed. Usually the distance between the heads is fixed 
and the tape speed is variable. It is done that way for obvious technical reasons: it’s much 
easier to vary the tape speed than the distance between the heads. In the digital case, it’s 
just the opposite, because varying the tape speed means performing sampling-rate conver­
sion between the digital tape and the output, while varying the distance between the 
heads is relatively simple, so that is what we are going to do:
Arrays
Building a Delay
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 156


--- Page 157 ---

There’s also another difference: in the analog world the tape is moving. If we want to move 
our digital tape we would need to copy all array elements to their neighbor positions at 
each audio clock, which is quite CPU intensive. Instead, we will move the heads.
From the preceding, we can conclude that we will need the following:
▪
array – to simulate our digital tape loop
▪
write index – this is our record head
▪
read index – this is our playback head
The write and the read indices will be moving through the array sample by sample. When 
either of them reaches the end of the array, it needs to be reset to the beginning of the 
array (that corresponds to connecting the open ends of the tape into a loop). The differ­
ence between the write and the read position corresponds to the delay time measured in 
samples.
This technique is quite common in programming and is called “circular buffer” or “ring buf­
fer”.
We start by programming the record head. It operates similarly to the sawtooth oscillator 
we programmed earlier, except that the computations are done in integer mode. The value 
increment is one per audio tick and the output value range is from 0 to N-1, where N is 
the size of the array. Let’s put the circuitry for computing the write index into a RecordPos 
macro:
Arrays
Building a Delay
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 157


--- Page 158 ---

The N input should receive the number of elements in the array and the Pos output will 
carry the current writing position (index). Here is how this macro can be implemented 
(compare this to the sawtooth oscillator implementation):
Note that the comparison module is set to >=. That was unimportant for the sawtooth os­
cillator, we could use >= or > there, but in integer computations the difference is in most 
cases critical. Using >= condition ensures that the write index will never reach a value of 
N (which would be out of range).
On the top-level, we create an array module and connect it to the RecordPos through the 
Size [] module (available in Built‑In Module > Memory > Size []), which reports the size of
the array:
The size property of the array can be set to 44,100. This will allow us as much as 1 sec­
ond of delay (actually one sample less) at 44.1 kHz sampling rate:
Arrays
Building a Delay
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 158


--- Page 159 ---

Now we need to compute the read index, which we will do by building two macros. The 
first macro will convert the requested delay time into the distance in samples:
That can be done by multiplying the time in seconds by the sampling rate in Hz. We also 
should not forget to clip the result, a clipping macro Expert Macro > Clipping >IClipMin­
Max should be good for that:
We clip to N-1 because that’s the maximum distance between two different array ele­
ments. Note the conversion to integers, which is done after the multiplication.
Arrays
Building a Delay
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 159


--- Page 160 ---

Alternatively, we could have clipped the input value (to a different range, of course), and that 
is generally a little bit better, because float values which are out of the range of integer repre­
sentation can produce arbitrary integer values, in which case we would no longer get true clip­
ping.
Now, we use another macro to compute the read index from the RecordPos and Distance:
Obviously, the playback position must be the Distance in samples behind the record posi­
tion; therefore, we subtract one from the other:
The distance value is latched because it is produced by a control signal input, which po­
tentially can receive events at any time, and we do not want the subtraction happening at 
times other than at audio-clock events.
If we just subtract, the difference can turn out to be less than zero because our array is 
not a loop; its ends are not connected together. So we need to wrap the result:
▪
-1 must become N-1,
▪
-2 must become N-2,
▪
-3 must become N-3,
▪
and so on.
So we include another macro for wrapping:
Arrays
Building a Delay
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 160


--- Page 161 ---

Because we know that the difference cannot be smaller than –N+1 (because RecordPos is 
between 0 and N‑1 and Distance is between 0 and N-1), wrapping can be implemented as
simple addition of N:
Let’s get back to our top level structure. Now that we have the write and read indices, we 
just need to perform reading and writing:
Note that reading is happening after writing and that it’s clocked by the sampling-rate 
clock.
Here’s a proposed test structure. Don’t forget to put an ms2sec converter into the Delay 
core cell and to set the Delay core cell to monophonic mode:
Arrays
Building a Delay
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 161


--- Page 162 ---

Actually it’s a good idea to switch the delay to monophonic mode as soon as possible, be­
cause each voice will consume about 200K of memory. 44,100 samples, using 4 bytes 
(32 bit) each:
▪
44,100*4 = 176,400 bytes, which is a little bit more than 172K (a kilobyte has 
1024 bytes).
To test the above structure play notes on your midi keyboard and hear them delayed by the 
amount of time specified by the Time knob.
8.4
Tables
 
There’s another module similar to Array. The name of this module is Table and it can be 
found in the Built‑In In Module > Memory submenu:
The difference between a table and an array is that you can only read from a table; you 
cannot write to it. The values in a table are pre-initialized using the module’s properties. 
To get access to the list of the values press the button in the properties window:
Arrays
Tables
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 162


--- Page 163 ---

A new dialog will appear:
What you currently see is an empty table. It consists of a single element with zero value. 
You can type in new values manually, or you can import them from a file. If you go for the 
manual option you have to click the button.
Arrays
Tables
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 163


--- Page 164 ---

The following dialog appears:
There you need to select the type of values stored in the table, the table size (number of 
elements in the table), and a value to initialize all elements of the table.
Alternatively, you can import the table from a file. The file can be an audio file (WAV/
AIFF), a text file (TXT/ASC), or a Native Table File (NTF). To import from a file press the 
Open File button.
A file dialog will appear asking you to select a file. After that another dialog will appear 
asking you to select the data type for the table values.
Let’s use a table. We are going to build a sine-oscillator macro using a table lookup ap­
proach:
Inside this macro we are going to create a table module:
We initialize the table from the file sinetable.txt, which we’ve prepared for you in the Core 
Tutorial Examples folder in your Reaktor installation. It’s a text file containing values for 
one period and one sample of sine function. Import it as Float32 type values:
Arrays
Tables
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 164


--- Page 165 ---

You can also view the loaded values as a waveform display. The List and Waveform buttons 
switch between the list and waveform view respectively.
Press OK to close the dialog and commit the loaded values to the table.
There’s also an FP Precision property setting in the properties window for the table. It 
doesn’t really control the precision of the values in the table (that you should have select­
ed when importing the file or manually creating a list of values), but rather it sets the for­
mal precision type of the table module’s output. Generally, you would keep it set to de­
fault:
Arrays
Tables
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 165


--- Page 166 ---

Now that we have the table, we can continue building the oscillator. At its core there will 
be a phase oscillator generating a rising sawtooth ramp signal from 0 to the size of the 
table minus one:
The phase oscillator implementation is similar to the sawtooth oscillator and to the record­
ing position in the delay:
A Read [] module connected to the phase oscillator and clocked by the sampling-rate 
clock will access the corresponding table element and output its value.
Arrays
Tables
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 166


--- Page 167 ---

Here’s the suggested test structure (don’t forget a P2F converter in the core cell):
An this is the panel view:
Of course, this is not a very clean sounding sine because we don’t have any interpolation 
in there. We leave it up to you to build an interpolating version if you wish.
Arrays
Tables
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 167

