--- Page 168 ---

9
Building Optimal Structures
 
As a rule, no tool is ideal. The Reaktor Core technology is no exception. Although this 
technology is quite powerful on its own, you do need to know a few things to get the most 
out of it. So here are some essential tips and tricks to get you going.
9.1
Latches and Modulation Macros
 
Use Latches and/or modulation macros at all necessary places to ensure that events are 
delayed until the values they carry actually need to be processed.
Here is a structure which uses a modulation macro for multiplication in an audio iteration 
loop. Using the modulation macro prevents the processing from being triggered by events 
at the a input:
Alternatively one could use an explicit latch in the structure:
There were multiple examples of this technique throughout this tutorial.
Using latches has to do both with performance optimization and the correctness of your 
structures. Some typical mistakes in structure programming have to do with sending 
events to certain modules at improper times.
Don’t be afraid that the latches will slow down the performance of your structures. Latches 
do not require much computation, and in many cases, they use absolutely no CPU time.
Building Optimal Structures
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 168


--- Page 169 ---

Latches are generally preferable to routing for event filtering because of their lower CPU 
cost. Try to use routers only where the processing logic dictates routing.
9.2
Routing and Merging
 
Routing can be more or less CPU intensive depending on the situation and the platform. If 
you can avoid routing without adding other CPU-intensive operations to your structure, do 
so.
Sometimes ES Ctl routing can be replaced by using Latches. If possible, do so.
If you split the event path into two branches using a Router, it’s a good idea to merge the 
branches generated by the outputs of the Router:
It’s also a good idea to merge to the incoming (unsplit) event to the Router:
Merging is not necessarily done by using a Merge module. Any arithmetic or a similar mod­
ule will do the job:
Building Optimal Structures
Routing and Merging
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 169


--- Page 170 ---

Merging can also happen inside a macro (depending on its internal structure):
It may be reasonable or necessary to merge the branches generated by different Routers, 
but beware of higher CPU loads in that case.
9.3
Numerical Operations
 
Floating point addition, multiplication, subtraction, absolute value, and negation are gen­
erally the least CPU-intensive float operations. Integer addition, subtraction and negation 
are the least CPU-intensive integer operations. Integer absolute value is also more or less 
OK. DN Cancel currently uses plain addition, as you may remember.
Float division, and integer multiplication and division are significantly more CPU intensive 
on average.
It is advisable to group your operations in a way that the most CPU intensive ones get eval­
uated as rarely as possible. For example, if you need to compute normalized frequency by 
dividing the frequency in Hz by the sampling rate it could be reasonable to compute the 
reciprocal of the sampling rate first and multiply the frequency by the result:
In the above structure, the division will be performed only when the sample rate changes, 
which should be pretty rare. Changes to the frequency will trigger only multiplication.
Compare that to the more straightforward implementation of the same formula:
Building Optimal Structures
Numerical Operations
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 170


--- Page 171 ---

where the division would be executed in response to every change of frequency.
9.4
Conversions Between Floats and Integers
 
Generally, avoid all unnecessary conversions between float and integer numbers. Depend­
ing on the platform such conversions could use significant amounts of CPU. The conver­
sions that are necessary to do are OK, of course.
Although the following structure might work as expected, in fact, there are two unnecessa­
ry conversions between integer and float types:
The first conversion happens at the input of the adder module in the middle. This module 
is set to the float mode, but it receives an integer input signal. Therefore an integer to 
float conversion will be done. The second conversion is at the input of the absolute value 
module, which is set to integer mode, but receives a float input. There, a conversion from 
float to integer will be done.
This would be a much better way to do it:
All modules are set to integer modes, therefore no conversions will be done.
Clock signals generally should have float type, but if an integer signal is used, that’s no 
problem:
Building Optimal Structures
Conversions Between Floats and Integers
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 171


--- Page 172 ---

Even though the clock input of the ILatch is float, it’s clocked by an integer signal, but 
because the clock value is unimportant, no conversion is done.
Building Optimal Structures
Conversions Between Floats and Integers
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 172

