--- Page 175 ---

11
Appendix B. Reaktor Core Concept
 
11.1
B.1. Signals and Events
 
There are signals of float and integer types.
Float ports look like this:
An integer ports look like this:
Signals propagate through connections from outputs to connected inputs in the form of 
events. An event is a basic action that happens at a particular output and usually results 
in a change of the value at that output; an event can also result in the same value at the 
output.
All events originating from the same event source are considered simultaneous. Simultane­
ous means that if two such events arrive at several inputs of the same module, they arrive 
at the same time.
The same source means the same output, additionally under certain circumstances several 
outputs can be considered the same event source. For example, all core-cell audio inputs 
and standard sampling-rate clock connections are considered to be the same event source. 
During initialization all outputs sending events are considered the same event source. The 
same source doesn’t mean the same value in this context, but rather it means simultane­
ousness.
Unless a given module is an event source, the only thing that can trigger it to process in­
coming values is one or more events arriving at its inputs. In case of multiple events only 
one output event will be generated, since the input events are considered to arrive simul­
taneously.
Appendix B. Reaktor Core Concept
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 175


--- Page 176 ---

11.2
B.2. Initialization
 
Initialization of the structures is done as follows. First, all values are reset to zeroes. Then 
an initialization event is sent simultaneously from all initialization sources. Generally, 
those are constants, core-cell inputs (not always), and clocks. That’s it.
11.3
B.3. OBC Connections
 
OBC (Object Bus Connections) are connections between modules which do not send any 
signals, but declare that the modules share a common state (memory). The most common 
example of an OBC connection is a connection between Read and Write modules access­
ing the same stored value.
11.4
B.4. Routing
 
You can use Router modules to direct the flow of events between two possible paths. In 
case a Router chooses one output path for incoming events, the other output receives no 
events (in particular, that means the value of the other output cannot change).
The Router is controlled by a BoolCtl type of input connection. On the other side of the 
connection you would typically have a Compare module (sometimes a few intermediate 
modules like BoolCtl macro ports can be placed between the Compare and the Router).
By using Routers you can dynamically enable or disable evaluations in parts of your struc­
ture.
Typically, after splitting the signal path in two using a Router, you would merge the two 
branches using a Merge or other module. Often you would merge a branch with the origi­
nal, unsplit signal. But generally you are free to do whatever you want there (be careful 
with performance issues though).
11.5
B.5. Latching
 
Latching is probably the most common technique in Reaktor Core. It means using Latch 
modules to prevent events from being sent at the wrong time. For example you wouldn’t 
want a control signal event to trigger a computation in an audio loop.
Appendix B. Reaktor Core Concept
B.2. Initialization
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 176


--- Page 177 ---

Alternatively you can use macros from the Expert Macros > Modulation group, which are 
basically a set of the most typical combinations of Latches with arithmetic processing 
modules.
11.6
B.6. Clocking
 
Clocks are sources of events. The clock events typically occur at regular time intervals cor­
responding to the clock rate. You normally need clocks to drive various modules, such as 
oscillators, filters, and so on. Most of the implementations of such modules do not require 
an explicit clock connection from the outside, but implicitly use a standard clock source 
available in core structures. That source is the sample rate clock, which runs at the de­
fault audio rate.
Note that in event core cells, although the connection to the sample rate clock is availa­
ble, the clock signal itself is not available. Therefore most oscillators, filters, and similar 
modules will not run in event core cells.
Appendix B. Reaktor Core Concept
B.6. Clocking
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 177

