--- Page 133 ---

7
More Signal Types
 
7.1
Float Signals
 
 
The most common signal type used for DSP (digital signal processing) on modern personal 
computers is floating point (float for short). Floats can represent a wide range of values, as 
large as 1038 (in 32 bit mode) or even 10308 (in 64 bit mode). As useful as they are, floats 
have a drawback – limited precision. The precision is higher in 64 bit mode, but it is still 
limited.
The precision of float values is limited for technical reasons. If it weren’t limited, float values 
would require an infinite amount of memory to store and processing them would require an 
infinitely fast CPU. It’s similar to the impossibility of writing the full decimal representation of 
a transcendental number, such as π, on a finite piece of paper. Even if you can somehow 
compute all the digits (which is not always possible for transcendental numbers), you will 
eventually run out of paper (and time).
The signals and memory storage that we have been discussing so far use 32 bit floating 
point numbers for their representation. Reaktor Core also offers the possibility of using 64 
bit floats, should you need higher precision (or a larger value range, although it’s difficult 
to imagine that 10-38 to 1038 is not a large enough range).
By default all processing in Reaktor Core is done in 32 bit floats. This doesn’t exactly mean 
that the signals are really processed as 32 bit floats, but rather that at minimum, 32 bit floats 
will be used for processing (although 64 bit floats may occasionally be used for intermediate 
results).
You can change the floating point precision for individual modules as well as for whole 
macros. For individual modules you do so in the module’s FP Precision (floating point pre­
cision) property:
More Signal Types
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 133


--- Page 134 ---

▪
default means use whatever precision is the default for the current structure
▪
32 bit use minimum 32 bits of precision
▪
64 bit use minimum 64 bits of precision
Changing the precision for a module means that the processing within that module will be 
done using the precision specified and that the output value will be generated using the 
same precision.
You can also change the default precision for whole structures by right-clicking on the 
background and selecting Owner Properties to open the properties of the owner module:
More Signal Types
Float Signals
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 134


--- Page 135 ---

So changed, the default precision will be effective for all modules inside the current struc­
ture, including macros, as long as they do not define their own precision (or in the case of 
macros, if a new default precision is defined for their respective inside structures).
Normal floating point signals of 32 and 64 bit precision are fully compatible with each other 
and can be freely interconnected. OBC signals of different precision are not compatible with 
each other (because you cannot have storage that is simultaneously 32 and 64 bit). Also, for 
OBC signals ‘default’, ’32 bit’ and ’64 bit’ settings are all considered different and incompati­
ble, because the effective default precision can be changed by changing the properties of one 
of the owning macros.
The input and output modules of top-level structures of core cells always send and receive 32 
bit floats, because that is the type of the signal used for Reaktor primary-level event and audio 
connections.
7.2
Integer Signals
 
There is another data type commonly supported by modern CPUs, and actually this one is 
more fundamental to the digital world than floats. It is the integer type. Integer numbers 
are represented and processed with infinite precision. Although the precision of integers is 
infinite, the range of representable integer values is limited. For 32 bit integers the values 
can go up to more than 109.
Infinite precision for storage and processing of integer values is possible because they don’t 
have any decimal digits after the period, so you can write them using a finite number of digits. 
Let’s write down the number of seconds in an hour: 3, 6, 0, 0, done. It’s that easy. If you try 
to write down the value of π you cannot do it completely: 3, 1, 4, 1, stop. Not complete, OK 
let’s write a couple more digits: 5, 9, stop. Still not complete, and so on. With an integer 
number you can do it completely and precisely: 3600, that’s it.
While floating point is a natural choice for values that are changing continuously, as are 
audio signals, for discretely changing values (for example, counters) integers may be a 
more appropriate choice.
More Signal Types
Integer Signals
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 135


--- Page 136 ---

Many Reaktor Core modules can be switched to integer mode, in which case they expect 
integer signals at their inputs; they process them as integers (that means with infinite pre­
cision); and they produce the integer outputs. Examples of such modules include arith­
metic modules like adder, multiplier, or subtractor. There are even some modules that can 
be used only on integers.
Minimum 32 bit length is guaranteed for Reaktor Core integer values.
Switching between float and integer types (if it’s supported by the module) is done in the 
Signal Type property of the module:
A module set to integer type will process the input values as integers and produce integer 
output values. You can tell that a module is in integer state by the fact that its signal in­
puts and outputs look different:
There is no such thing as default signal type for macros. The reason is that normally you 
wouldn’t build structures that process integers in exactly the same way as structures proc­
essing floats and vice versa (although you might for some relatively simple structures).
More Signal Types
Integer Signals
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 136


--- Page 137 ---

Integer signals can be freely interconnected with floats, but the wires created between dif­
ferent type signals will perform signal conversion, which can use a certain amount of CPU. 
At the time of this writing, the extra CPU usage is somewhat noticeable on PCs and quite 
significant on Macs. The OBC connections of float and integer types are not compatible 
with each other, of course.
There can also be information loss during such conversions. In particular, large integers 
cannot be precisely represented by floats, and obviously, floats cannot be precisely repre­
sented by integers. Large floats (larger than the largest representable integer) cannot be 
represented as integers at all, in which case the result of the conversion in undefined. 
During float-to-integer conversion, the values will be rounded approximately to the nearest 
integer. We say approximately because the result of rounding 0.5 can be either 0 or 1, al­
though you can rely on the fact that 0.49 will be rounded to 0, and 0.51 to 1.
It is important to understand that turning the processing mode of an operation to integer 
and converting of a floating point result of the same operation to an integer is not the 
same. Let’s consider an example. Here we are adding two numbers 2.4 and 4.3 as floats. 
The result is clearly 6.7, which when converted to integer will produce 7. So the output of 
the following structure is 8:
Now if we change the mode of the first adder to integer, instead of adding 2.4 and 4.3 we 
will add their rounded versions which are 2 and 4 respectively, producing 6. So the result 
is 7:
Clock inputs completely ignore their incoming values, therefore they are normally always 
floats. Furthermore, signal type conversion will not be performed for the signals that are 
used only as clocks:
More Signal Types
Integer Signals
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 137


--- Page 138 ---

Here the clock input of the Read module is still float although the module has been set to 
integer mode (the OBC ports look the same regardless whether they are float or integer).
Integer feedback is automatically resolved in the same way as float feedback – by inserting an 
integer mode Z^-1 module (of course no denormal canceling is needed here).
7.3
Building an Event Counter
 
Let’s build an event counter macro. The function of this macro is similar to an event accu­
mulator, but instead of summing the values of events, this one will just count them. Inte­
ger signal type seems a logical choice for counting:
The output and all built-in modules have been set to integer mode here. The ILatch macro 
is used instead of Latch for resetting the circuitry. It does exactly the same (and can be 
found in the same menu), buts work on integer signals. Also, an integer modulation macro 
is used (it’s found in Expert Macro > Modulation > Integer menu). Both inputs do not need 
to be set to integer mode, because they provide only clock signals.
If we take a look at the structure of the event core cell containing this macro:
More Signal Types
Building an Event Counter
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 138


--- Page 139 ---

we’ll see that the output of this module is not set to the integer mode (it’s also not possi­
ble to set it to integer mode). That’s because the core cell being a Reaktor primary level 
module on the outside must output a normal primary-level event, which is a float value.
Here is a testing structure for the counter module:
And the resulting panel:
7.4
Building a Rising Edge Counter Macro
 
Now we are going to discuss a sign comparison technique which you might sometimes 
need in building Reaktor Core structures. Sign comparison is a special way of comparing 
two numbers, in which you ignore their values and pay attention only to their signs (plus or 
minus). Naturally, plus is considered greater than minus. So for example:
▪
3.1 is sign-greater than –1.4
▪
2.1 is sign-equal to 5.0
▪
4.5 is sign-equal to –2.9
Beware that the sign of zero is undefined, which means that result of any sign comparison in­
volving a zero value can be arbitrary.
More Signal Types
Building a Rising Edge Counter Macro
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 139


--- Page 140 ---

Of course you could have implemented the sign comparison using several Comparison 
modules and several Routers, but there is a more efficient way. The sign comparison can 
be done in Reaktor Core structures using the Compare Sign module (Built‑In Module >
Flow > Compare Sign):
This module produces a BoolCtl signal at the output, so that you can connect it to a Rout­
er.
One of the possible uses of such a module is detecting the rising edges of an incoming 
signal. Below we are going to build a rising edge counter Reaktor Core macro:
Note that the output is set to integer mode because the count is an integer value.
The first thing we are going to need inside is an edge detector macro to convert the detect­
ed edge to an event:
This is how the detector macro can be implemented:
More Signal Types
Building a Rising Edge Counter Macro
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 140


--- Page 141 ---

The chain at the bottom keeps the previous input signal value. As you can see the new 
value is stored after the old one is read. The last Write module in the chain performs the 
initialization job for the previous value storage. We initialize the storage to –1 so that the 
first positive value will be counted as a rising edge.
Having a Write module at the end of an OBC chain is another way (as opposed to Merge) to 
initialize the storage. It must be the last Write module in the chain in order to overwrite the 
results stored by upstream Write modules.
The Router controlled by the Sign Comparison module will gate the events, letting through 
only those where a sign change from negative to positive occurs.
It’s not clear whether such a module will send an event during initialization or not, partic­
ularly because the storage is still zero at the time of initialization event processing, and 
the sign of zero is undefined. We can modify this structure in order to avoid sending an 
event during the initialization:
More Signal Types
Building a Rising Edge Counter Macro
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 141


--- Page 142 ---

The ES Ctl module is an event sensitive control. The control signal produced by this mod­
ule is true only if there is an incoming event at the input of this module. Because this in­
put is disconnected in the above structure, which means it’s connected to a zero constant, 
the only time the control signal is true is at initialization. So the second router will block 
any event occurring during initialization and let all others through.
Note that here we have an example of a module that does not send any event from its output 
during initialization.
Now that we have a detector module we can connect it to the counting circuitry that we 
already have:
The function of the above circuitry should be clear: The Detect module sends an event 
each time it detects a rising edge, these events are counted by the Evt Cnt module.
To test it, let’s put this macro into an audio core cell, and count the rising edges of a saw­
tooth waveform. The internal structure of the core cell will look like:
and the primary level test structure:
More Signal Types
Building a Rising Edge Counter Macro
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 142


--- Page 143 ---

(Don’t forget to set the Meter properties as in previous examples.)
Here is what you should see in the panel:
The speed of the number change in the meter must correspond to the frequency of the os­
cillator, defined by the pitch knob. At the pitch value of zero the oscillator frequency is 
approximately 8 Hz, so the numbers should increment at approximately the rate of 8 per 
second.
More Signal Types
Building a Rising Edge Counter Macro
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 143

