--- Page 85 ---

4
Structures with Internal State
 
4.1
Clock Signals
 
How a Reaktor Core module processes an incoming event is completely up to the module. 
Normally a module would process the incoming value in some way, but it can also com­
pletely ignore it. The most typical case of such processing is clock inputs.
One example of a module with a clock input is a Latch. The Latch is not a built-in module; 
it’s a macro; nevertheless, it’s perfect for demonstrating the clock principle.
The Latch has two inputs – one for the value and one for the clock.
The value input (the upper one) will store the incoming value to the internal memory of the 
latch in response to an incoming event; nothing will be sent to the output. The clock input 
will send the last stored value to the output in response to an incoming event.
Clock inputs (unless otherwise specified) completely ignore the value of the incoming event 
and respond only to the fact that the event is coming.
(Because now we are discussing clock signals, not latches, examples of using the Latch 
module will come later.)
Because there are modules with clock inputs, it should be clear that some of the signals in 
the structure do not carry any used (or, for that matter, useful) values. Some signals can 
even be produced for the sole purpose of being used as a clock source. We will call them 
clock signals.
A sampling-rate clock is one example of a clock signal. It produces an event for each new 
audio sample to be generated, so at 44.1 kHz sampling rate it would tick 44,100 times 
per second. The value of the signal has no meaning, is not intended to be used in any way, 
and is (in the current implementation) always zero.
Structures with Internal State
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 85


--- Page 86 ---

4.2
Object Bus Connections
 
Object Bus Connections (OBC) are a special type of connection between modules. An OBC 
connection between two modules declares that they share some internal object. The most 
typical case of modules using OBC connections are memory Read and Write modules, 
which would share a common memory if connected by an OBC.
The functionality of the Write module is to write a value that is incoming at its input, to 
the OBC-shared memory. The functionality of the Read module is to read a value from the 
OBC-shared memory in response to an incoming clock signal (C input). The read value is 
sent to the output of the Read module.
The above structure implements the functionality of the Latch macro (in fact, it is the in­
ternal structure of the Latch macro). The M and S pins of Read and Write modules are 
pins of Latch OBC type. The M pin is the master connection input, the S pin is the slave 
connection output. The master input of the Read module is connected to the slave output 
of the Write module (the other two master and slave pins are unused). Therefore in this 
structure the Write and Read modules share the common memory.
In the next structure, there are two pairs of Write and Read modules. Each pair has its own 
memory. Notice that the connection in the middle (from the output of Read to the input of 
Write) is not an OBC connection.
Structures with Internal State
Object Bus Connections
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 86


--- Page 87 ---

One could ask what the difference is between master and slave. From the point of view of 
owning the shared object (in this case memory), there is no difference. However, as you 
may remember from a previous section of this manual, there is a rule that upstream mod­
ules are processed before downstream modules when processing simultaneous events. 
Therefore, in the two last examples the Write modules will be processed before their slave 
Read modules, which is obviously not the same as the reverse.
The relative order of processing of OBC connected modules is defined using the same rules as 
for other modules: upstream modules are processed first.
Indeed, let’s consider two different cases. In both cases, the original state of the memory 
will be 2, and the same event of value 5 will be sent to both the Write and Read modules. 
In one case, the Write module will be the master and in the other case the Read will be 
the master.
Above we have the structure for the first case. The module on the left side sends an event 
of value 5, which first arrives at the Write module, causing it to write the new value of 5 
into the memory shared by the Write and Read modules. Next, the event arrives at the 
Read module, working as a clock event and triggering the read operation, which in turn 
reads the recently stored value of 5 and sends it to the output. That is the functionality 
provided by the Latch macro in the Reaktor Core macro library.
Structures with Internal State
Object Bus Connections
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 87


--- Page 88 ---

Now consider the second structure:
Here we have the opposite situation. First, the clock event arrives at the Read module, 
sending the stored value of 2 to the output. Only after that does the event arrive at the 
input of the Write module, changing the stored value to 5. This structure implements the 
functionality of a Z-1 block (one sample delay), widely used in DSP theory. Indeed, the out­
put value is always one step behind the input value here.
As mentioned, the above structure implements the Z-1 functionality. However, before you can 
really build or use such structures yourself, there are a few other important things you have to 
know, so please read on.
When there are more than two modules connected by OBC wires, they all share the same 
object. Then it becomes very important to know whether the order of specific read and 
write operations is important, and if so, what that order should be.
For example, in the following structure the relative order of the two read operations is un­
defined, but they both happen after the write operation, so it should be completely OK:
In the next structure, the relative order of the write operation and the second read opera­
tion is undefined. That can be a potentially dangerous structure and generally has to be 
avoided:
Structures with Internal State
Object Bus Connections
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 88


--- Page 89 ---

A better way to realize the above structure is possibly this one:
Or this one:
Even when it appears that the relative order of read and write operations is irrelevant, it 
doesn’t hurt to impose a particular order, and it’s a little bit safer.
The relative order of write operations is important. The relative order of read operations does 
not matter, as long as their order relative to the write operations remains defined.
OBC connections are not compatible with normal signal connections. Furthermore, OBC con­
nections corresponding to different types of objects (for example, different floating point pre­
cision of memory storage) are not compatible with each other. Pins of incompatible types can­
not be connected; for example, you cannot connect a normal signal output to an OBC input.
Structures with Internal State
Object Bus Connections
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 89


--- Page 90 ---

4.3
Initialization
 
As we are starting to work with objects that have an internal state (in case of Read and 
Write, the shared memory of the objects is their internal state), it becomes important to 
understand what the initial state of the structure you’ve built is. For example if we are go­
ing to read a value from memory (using a Read module) before anything is written to it, 
what value will be read? And, if we don’t like the default value, how can we change it?
Those questions are addressed by the initialization mechanism of Reaktor Core. The initi­
alization of core structures is performed in the following way:
1.
First, all state elements are initialized to some default values, usually zeroes. Particu­
larly all shared memory and all output values of the modules will be set to zeroes, un­
less explicitly specified otherwise in the documentation
2.
Second, an initialization event is sent simultaneously from all initialization sources. 
The initialization sources include most of the modules that do not have an input: 
Const modules (including QuickConsts), core cell inputs (typically), and some others. 
The sources would normally send their initial values during an initialization event; for 
example, constants would send their values and core cell inputs would send the initial 
values received from the primary level structure outside.
If a module is an initialization event source, you will find information about initialization in 
the module reference section for the module. If a module is not an initialization source, it 
treats the initialization event exactly like any other incoming event. Mostly initialization sour­
ces are those and only those modules that do not have inputs.
Here’s a look at how initialization works:
Structures with Internal State
Initialization
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 90


--- Page 91 ---

This is a part of the structure; the Read module on the left is connected to some clock 
source, which also sends an initialization event (as clock sources typically do).
Initially, all signal outputs and the internal state of Read-Write-Read chain are set to zero.
Then an initialization event is sent simultaneously from the clock source and from the con­
stant 5.
The Read module on the left is processed before the Write module and therefore the clock 
event arrives there before the new value is written into the memory, so the output of this 
module is zero. Then the value is written into the memory by the Write module. Now the 
second Read module is triggered, producing a value of 5 at the output. Lastly the adder 
module is processed, producing a sum of 5.
As you remember, disconnected inputs are treated in Reaktor Core as zero values (unless oth­
erwise specified by a particular module). More precisely, they are treated as zero constants. 
That means that these inputs also receive the initialization event, exactly as if a real constant 
module with zero value were connected there.
Structures with Internal State
Initialization
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 91


--- Page 92 ---

Above, an adder with one input disconnected and one connected to a constant module re­
ceives two simultaneous initialization events, one from the default zero constant connec­
tion and one from a real connection to a constant.
There can also be special meaning for disconnected inputs that are not signal inputs (obvious­
ly they cannot be connected to a zero constant). For example a disconnected master input of a 
Write module means that the shared memory chain starts there and continues to the modules 
connected to the slave output.
4.4
Building an Event Accumulator
 
The event accumulator module that we want to build now is going to have two inputs: one 
for the event values to be accumulated, and one for resetting the accumulator to zero. 
There is also going to be one output, which outputs the sum of the accumulated events.
We are going to build this module in the form of a core macro, which would be easy to use 
inside an event core cell:
This is what the inside of our macro looks like:
Structures with Internal State
Building an Event Accumulator
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 92


--- Page 93 ---

Obviously the accumulator module needs to have an internal state where it’s going to store 
its current accumulated value. We are going to use Read and Write modules to build the 
accumulator loop. They can be found in the Built‑In In Module > Memory submenu:
The module which you see on the left (with an arrow pointing outwards) is the Read mod­
ule and the module on the right (arrow pointing inwards) in the Write module.
In response to an incoming event, the accumulator loop should take the current value and 
add the new value to it. Therefore, we have to use a Read module to retrieve the current 
state, use an adder to add the new value, and use a Write module to store the sum.
Note that the Read module is clocked by the incoming event and, of course, that its OBC-
connected Write module is located downstream, because we want to write after we read.
The above structure works in the sense that it accumulates incoming values and outputs 
their total at its output. What is missing is reset functionality and circuitry to ensure the 
correct initial state.
Let’s build the resetting circuitry first. Because we are within the Reaktor Core world, the 
In input and the Rst input can send events simultaneously, and if we want this to be a 
generally usable core macro, we need to take that into account. Let’s assume that the In 
and Rst inputs simultaneously produce an event. What do we want to happen? Is the reset 
Structures with Internal State
Building an Event Accumulator
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 93


--- Page 94 ---

logically supposed to happen before the accumulated event is processed or after? (This is 
very similar to the difference between the Latch and the Z-1 functionality, which differ only 
in relative processing order for the signal and clock inputs).
We suggest taking the Latch approach, because that module is very widely used in Reaktor 
Core structures, and therefore such behavior would be more intuitive. In a Latch, the clock 
signal logically arrives later than the value signal. In our case, the reset signal should ar­
rive logically after the accumulated signal (forcing the state and the output to zero). There­
fore, we need to somehow override the accumulator output with an initial value. To ach­
ieve that we will need to use a new concept, which we are about to discuss.
4.5
Event Merging
 
You have seen various ways of combining two different signals in Reaktor Core, including 
arithmetic operations and other ways. What has been missing is a way to simply merge two 
signals.
Merging is not adding. Merging means that the result of the operation is the last incoming 
value, rather than the sum of all incoming values. To merge signals you need to use the 
Merge module. Let’s take a look at how it works.
Imagine we have a Merge module with two inputs. The initial output value (before the ini­
tialization event) is, as for most of the modules, zero:
Now an event with a value of 4 arrives at the second input of the module:
Structures with Internal State
Event Merging
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 94


--- Page 95 ---

The event goes through the module and appears at the output. Now the output of the 
merge has a value of 4.
Then another even with a value of 5 arrives at the first input:
The event goes through the module and appears at the output, which changes its value to 
5.
Now two events with values of 2 and 8 arrive simultaneously at both inputs.
Here we have a special rule for the Merge module:
Events arriving simultaneously at the inputs of a Merge module are processed in the order of 
the input numbering. Still there is only one output event generated, because a Reaktor Core 
output cannot produce several simultaneous events.
In the above case this means that the event at the second input will be processed after the 
first event, overriding the value of 2 by the value of 8, which then appears at the output.
4.6
Event Accumulator with Reset and Initialization
 
So, in order to achieve the desired reset functionality we need to override the adder output 
by some initial value. To do this we can use a Merge module (found in the Built‑In Module
> Flow submenu). The simplest way is to connect the second input of the merge module to 
the Rst input.
Structures with Internal State
Event Accumulator with Reset and Initialization
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 95


--- Page 96 ---

Now the reset event will be immediately sent to the Merge module, overriding the adder 
output, should the accumulated event arrive at the same time. From there it goes to the 
output and into the internal state of the accumulator.
In the above structure, the value occurring at the Rst input will be used as the new value 
of the accumulator. Maybe it’s even not such a bad idea, but then it’s not exactly a reset 
function, but rather a set function, as implemented in the standard Reaktor event accu­
mulator module. If we want to have a true reset function we should write only zero values 
into the state, regardless of the value appearing at the Rst input. So what we have to do is 
to send a zero value to the Write module each time an event occurs at the Rst input.
Sending an event with a particular value in response to an incoming event is a quite com­
mon operation in Reaktor Core, and we suggest using the Latch library macro for that. Ex­
pert Macro > Memory > Latch:
As we have already described, the Latch module has a value input (top) and a clock input 
(bottom). We need to connect the Rst input to the clock input of the latch to trigger the 
sending of an event to the output of the latch, and we also need to connect a zero con­
stant to the value input of the latch, because we want the output events to always be zero. 
Or we can remember that disconnected inputs are considered to be zero constants (unless 
otherwise specified), and we can leave the value input of the latch disconnected:
Structures with Internal State
Event Accumulator with Reset and Initialization
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 96


--- Page 97 ---

Now the reset works as specified.
The last thing we have to do is ensure the correct initialization, which of course requires 
defining what is the correct initialization. Let’s take a look at how the above structure is 
going to be initialized.
If the initialization event is sent simultaneously from the In and Rst inputs of the core cell 
top-level structure, and also from the implicit zero constant at the value input of the 
Latch, then the Latch triggered by the Rst input will send a value of zero to the second 
input of the Merge, overriding whatever value arrives at the first input of the Merge. There­
fore, zero will be written into the internal state and sent to the output – perfect!
There’s one little problem with that, however. It could be that the initialization event 
doesn’t arrive at one or both of the ports. That could be because the initialization event 
didn’t arrive at the corresponding input of the event core cell or because this macro is 
used in a more complicated Reaktor Core structure that also doesn’t get the initialization 
event on all its wires (we will learn how that can be arranged later). So we need to do a 
last final modification to the structure to make it more universal.
Go to the properties of the Merge module and change the number of inputs to 3.
Structures with Internal State
Event Accumulator with Reset and Initialization
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 97


--- Page 98 ---

Now, even if there was no event arriving at the Rst input, the implicit zero constant at the 
third input of the Merge would still send an initialization event, producing the correct out­
put and initial state values.
Let’s try out our new event accumulator by building the following primary level structure 
using the newly created Event Accum module.
The instrument number of voices should be set to 1, and the meter should be set to dis­
play a value and to be always active, as in the previous example. The button should be set 
to the trigger mode.
Now switch to the Panel and see the values incrementing in steps of 1 each second and 
resetting in response to pressing the button.
Structures with Internal State
Event Accumulator with Reset and Initialization
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 98


--- Page 99 ---

We are going to use this opportunity to introduce Reaktor Core’s debug mode. As you’ve 
probably already noticed, unlike on Reaktor’s primary level, where you can see the value at 
the output of a module if you keep your mouse cursor over the output, output values don’t 
appear under the cursor in Reaktor Core structures. That is an unfortunate side effect of 
Reaktor Core’s internal optimization—values from Reaktor Core structures are typically un­
available on the outside.
Ok, we already hear you complaining, and we’ve provided a compromise. You can disable 
the optimization for a particular core structure in order to see the output values. Let’s try 
that with the structure we’ve just built. Right-click on the background and select Debug 
Mode:
Structures with Internal State
Event Accumulator with Reset and Initialization
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 99


--- Page 100 ---

(You can do the same thing using the button with the bug icon on the toolbar). Now if you 
keep your cursor over a particular output, you will see its value (or range of values):
You can disable debug mode by selecting the same command (or pressing the button with 
the bug icon) again:
Structures with Internal State
Event Accumulator with Reset and Initialization
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 100


--- Page 101 ---

Also, it will be automatically turned off when you leave the structure, so you may need to 
enable it again for another structure. After debugging our core macro we might consider 
saving it as a separate file for future use. That can be done by right-clicking on the macro 
and selecting Save As…:
Structures with Internal State
Event Accumulator with Reset and Initialization
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 101


--- Page 102 ---

As with core cells you have the option of having your own macros in the menu. The macros 
have to be put into the Core Macros subfolder of the Reaktor user library folder:
Should any files be found in this Core Macros folder or its subfolders a new submenu ap­
pears in the right-click menu:
Structures with Internal State
Event Accumulator with Reset and Initialization
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 102


--- Page 103 ---

Similar restrictions apply to the Core Macros folder as apply to the Core Cells folder:
▪
empty folders are not displayed in the menu
▪
never put your own files into the system library, put them into your user library folder
4.7
Fixing the Event Shaper
 
We can now discuss in more detail exactly what’s wrong with the event shaper module 
structure we built earlier:
The problem is the initialization event. If you consider how the initialization of the above 
structure will happen you’ll notice the following:
Structures with Internal State
Fixing the Event Shaper
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 103


--- Page 104 ---

▪
the x input is firing or not firing an initialization event depending on whether it re­
ceives an initialization event from the outside, primary-level structure (that is the ini­
tialization event rule for core-cell event inputs)
▪
the constants 4 and 0.25 are always firing an initialization event
Thus, in case for whatever reason the initialization event does not occur at the input of the 
shaper, the output of the shaper will still receive the event from the last multiplier and will 
forward that event to the outside primary level structure.
Although for control signal processing purposes, that might be OK (in case of a missing 
input initialization event, the input is considered zero, and the output initialization event 
is still fired), it is not exactly what one would intuitively expect from an event processing 
module. A more intuitive behavior would be for the module to send an output event only in 
response to an incoming event.
So, the problem is that our two constant modules may be sending events at a wrong time 
(that is when there’s no input event). As a solution, we suggest replacing the subtraction 
and multiplication modules, which have constants at their inputs, with their Modulation 
counterparts.
The Modulation macros is a group of modules in the Reaktor Core library found under Ex­
pert Macro > Modulation:
Structures with Internal State
Fixing the Event Shaper
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 104


--- Page 105 ---

The name “Modulation”, although not 100% correct, still reflects their purpose of using 
one signal to modulate another. (That will be especially easy to see later, when we use 
control signals to modulate audio signals in low-level structures). Most of the modulation 
macros combine two signals, one is carrier and the other is modulator. Unlike built-in 
arithmetic core modules, the modulation macros generate output events only in response 
to events at the carrier input. The events at the modulator input do not trigger the recalcu­
lation process.
The internal implementation of modulation macros is very simple, they just latch the mod­
ulator signal, the latch being clocked by the carrier. Here is an example of a modulation 
multiplier macro’s internal structure:
The latch at the modulatior input (a) ensures that the modulator value will be sent to the 
multiplier only when the event at the carrier input arrives.
Here we replace the subtraction module by the a – x modulation macro and the second 
multiplication module by x mul a modulation macro. This is how our structure is going to 
look after the replacement (we also replaced the Const modules with QuickConst, but 
that’s unimportant):
You can normally tell the modulator inputs of modulation macros by their icons (pictures 
on the modules). A modulator input is indicated by an arrow icon. In case of the subtrac­
tion module, the arrow is on top, therefore the modulation input is on top. In case of the 
multiplication module, it’s the other way around. You may also notice that the output of 
Structures with Internal State
Fixing the Event Shaper
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 105


--- Page 106 ---

these modules is located against the carrier input, which is an additional source of infor­
mation. You can move your mouse cursor over the modules and their inputs and read the 
corresponding hint texts.
In the above structure no events will be sent unless there’s an event at the input of the 
core cell:
▪
the |x| module is triggered by the core cell input event directly
▪
the subsequent subtraction module will be triggered only by the output of the |x| mod­
ule, which sends an event only in response to the input event, the QuickConst has no 
triggering effect
▪
the first multiplier is triggered by either the output of the subtraction module or the 
core cell input event, but we have already seen that both occur only simultaneously
▪
the second multiplier is triggered only by the incoming event and not by the Quick­
Const
So, now our structure’s behavior is a little more intuitive.
Structures with Internal State
Fixing the Event Shaper
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 106

