--- Page 183 ---

15
Appendix F. Built-in Modules
 
15.1
F.1. Const
 
Produces a signal of a constant value. The value is displayed in the module.
INITIALIZATION EVENT: during initialization sends the event of the specified value to the 
output. This is the only time when this module sends an event.
PROPERTIES
Value: the value to be sent to the output
15.2
F.2. Math > +
 
Produces the sum of the incoming signals at the output. The output event is sent each 
time there is an event at either of the inputs or at both of them simultaneously.
15.3
F.3. Math > -
 
Produces the difference of the incoming signals at the output (the signal at the lower in­
put is subtracted from the signal at the upper input). The output event is sent each time 
there is an event at either of the inputs or at both of them simultaneously.
Appendix F. Built-in Modules
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 183


--- Page 184 ---

15.4
F.4. Math > *
 
Generates the multiplication product of the incoming signals at the output. The output 
event is sent each time there is an event at either of the inputs or at both of them simulta­
neously.
15.5
F.5. Math > /
 
Produces the quotient of the incoming signals at the output (the signal at the upper input 
is divided by the signal at the lower input). In integer mode performs a division with re­
mainder, the remainder being discarded. The output event is sent each time there is an 
event at either of the inputs or at both of them simultaneously.
15.6
F.6. Math > |x|
 
Produces the absolute value of the incoming signal at the output. The output event is sent 
each time there is an event at the input.
15.7
F.7. Math > –x
 
Appendix F. Built-in Modules
F.4. Math > *
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 184


--- Page 185 ---

Produces the inverted value (changes sign) of the incoming signal at the output. The out­
put event is sent each time there is an event at the input.
15.8
F.8. Math > DN Cancel
 
Modifies the incoming signal in a way to kill denormal numbers. This is currently imple­
mented by adding a very small constant. Works only on floating point numbers. The output 
event is sent each time there is an event at the input.
15.9
F.9. Math > ~log
 
Computes an approximation of a logarithm of the incoming value. The output event is sent 
each time there is an event at the input.
PROPERTIES
▪
Base: the logarithm base
▪
Precision: the approximation precision (better precisions require more CPU)
15.10 F.10. Math > ~exp
 
Computes an approximation of an exponent of the incoming value. The output event is 
sent each time there is an event at the input.
PROPERTIES
▪
Base: the exponent base
▪
Precision: the approximation precision (better precision requires more CPU)
Appendix F. Built-in Modules
F.8. Math > DN Cancel
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 185


--- Page 186 ---

15.11 F.11. Bit > Bit AND
 
Performs the bitwise conjunction of the incoming signals. Works only on integers. The out­
put event is sent each time there is an event at either of the inputs or at both of them 
simultaneously.
15.12 F.12. Bit > Bit OR
 
Performs the bitwise disjunction of the incoming signals. Works only on integers. The out­
put event is sent each time there is an event at either of the inputs or at both of them 
simultaneously.
15.13 F.13. Bit > Bit XOR
 
Performs the bitwise exclusive disjunction of the incoming signals. Works only on integers. 
The output event is sent each time there is an event at either of the inputs or at both of 
them simultaneously.
15.14 F.14. Bit > Bit NOT
 
Appendix F. Built-in Modules
F.11. Bit > Bit AND
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 186


--- Page 187 ---

Performs the bitwise inversion of the incoming signal. Works only on integers. The output 
event is sent each time there is an event at the input.
15.15 F.15. Bit > Bit <<
 
Bit-shifts the value at the upper input to the left (towards more significant bits). The 
amount of bits to shift by is specified by the lower input. The result for N < 0 and N > 31 
is undefined (use it only for 0 ≤ N ≤ 31). Works only on integers. The output event is sent 
each time there is an event at either of the inputs or at both of them simultaneously.
15.16 F.16. Bit > Bit >>
 
Bit-shifts the value at the upper input to the right (towards less significant bits). No sign 
extension is performed. The amount of bits to shift by is specified by the lower input. The 
result for N < 0 and N > 31 is undefined (use it only for 0 ≤ N ≤ 31). Works only on inte­
gers. The output event is sent each time there is an event at either of the inputs or at both 
of them simultaneously.
15.17 F.17. Flow > Router
 
Appendix F. Built-in Modules
F.15. Bit > Bit <<
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 187


--- Page 188 ---

Routes the signal at the signal input (the lower one) to one of the two outputs depending 
on the state of the control signal (the upper input). If control signal is in the true state it 
routes to output 1 (the upper one), and if control signal is in the false state it routes to 
output 0 (the lower one). The output event is sent to exactly one of the outputs each time 
there is an event at the signal input.
15.18 F.18. Flow > Compare
 
Produces a BoolCtl signal at the output indicating the result of comparison of the input 
values. The value at the upper input is placed to the left of the comparison sign and the 
value at the lower input to the right (so that the module on the picture above checks if 
upper value is greater than the lower one).
PROPERTIES
▪
Criterion the comparison operation to be performed
15.19 F.19. Flow > Compare Sign
 
Produces a BoolCtl signal at the output indicating the result of the sign comparison of the 
input values. The value at the upper input is placed to the left of the comparison sign and 
the value at the lower input to the right (so that the module on the picture above checks if 
the sign of the upper value is greater than the sign of the lower one).
The sign comparison is defined as follows:
▪
+ is equal to +
▪
– is equal to –
▪
+ is larger than –
The sign of zero value is undefined, so arbitrary result may be produced should one of the 
compared values be zero.
Appendix F. Built-in Modules
F.18. Flow > Compare
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 188


--- Page 189 ---

PROPERTIES
▪
Criterion the comparison operation to be performed
15.20 F.20. Flow > ES Ctl
 
Produces a BoolCtl signal at the output indicating the momentary presence of an event at 
the input (that is, the control signal is true if there is an event at the input of this module 
at the given moment).
15.21 F.21. Flow > ~BoolCtl
 
Produces a BoolCtl signal at the output which is an inversion of the input BoolCtl signal 
(true changes to false and vice versa).
15.22 F.22. Flow > Merge
 
An output event is sent each time there is an event at any of the inputs or at several of 
them simultaneously. If only one input receives the event at a given time, the value of the 
output event will be equal to the value of the input event. If several inputs receive an 
event simultaneously, the value at the lowest input (among those receiving the event) will 
be selected. For example, if both second and third (counting from top) inputs receive an 
event, the value at the third input will be taken.
PROPERTIES
▪
Input Count number of inputs of the module
Appendix F. Built-in Modules
F.20. Flow > ES Ctl
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 189


--- Page 190 ---

15.23 F.23. Flow > EvtMerge
 
The functionality is similar to that of the Merge module, except that all input values are 
ignored. The value of the output event is undefined. This module is intended to be used 
for generating signals to be used as clocks. Works only in floating point mode, since the 
value is not meant to be used anyway.
PROPERTIES
▪
Input Count number of inputs of the module
15.24 F.24. Memory > Read
 
Reads the stored value from the memory associated with the OBC chain that this module 
belongs to. The reading occurs in response to an event at the upper (clock) input and is 
sent to the upper output. The ports at the bottom are OBC master and slave connections, 
respectively.
15.25 F.25. Memory > Write
 
Appendix F. Built-in Modules
F.23. Flow > EvtMerge
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 190


--- Page 191 ---

Writes the value arriving at the upper input to the memory associated with the OBC chain 
that this module belongs to. The writing occurs in response to an event at the upper input. 
The ports at the bottom are OBC master and slave connections, respectively.
15.26 F.26. Memory > R/W Order
 
This module does not perform any action. It can be inserted into a structure to control the 
processing order of OBC-connected modules. The OBC ports at the bottom are OBC master 
and slave connections, which are internally connected in a “thru” way. The OBC input at 
the top is called the “sidechain” connection and allows you to place this module logically 
after the module connected to the sidechain input.
The sidechain connection can be connected only to normal Latch OBC type modules. The 
master and slave ports on the other hand can be connected to Latch or Array OBC type 
modules depending on the properties settings for the R/W Order module. In any case, the 
signal type and the precision must be the same for all connections to this module (e.F. 
you cannot connect side chain to an integer Read and the master and the slave to float 
modules at the same time).
PROPERTIES
▪
Connection Type type of the “thru” port connection (latch or array)
15.27 F.27. Memory > Array
 
Defines an array memory object. The module itself does not perform any action. All opera­
tions on the array are to be performed by the modules connected to the array output which 
is an OBC slave connection of array type.
Appendix F. Built-in Modules
F.26. Memory > R/W Order
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 191


--- Page 192 ---

PROPERTIES
▪
Size number of elements in the array
15.28 F.28. Memory > Size [ ]
 
Reports the size of the array object connected to the input. The size is a constant integer 
value.
INITIALIZATION EVENT: during initialization sends the event with the value of the array size 
to the output. This is the only time when this module sends an event.
15.29 F.29. Memory > Index
 
Provides access to a single array element. The access is provided in a form of a latch OBC 
connection associated with the array element. The association is established and/or 
changed by sending an event to the upper (index) input of the Index module, which is 
zero-based and is always in the integer mode. The lower input is the master OBC connec­
tion to the array. The output provides the latch OBC connection to the array element se­
lected by the index input. The base value type and precision are, of course, the same for 
both input and output OBC connections and are controlled by the module properties.
15.30 F.30. Memory > Table
 
Defines a pre-initialized read-only array. The module itself does not perform any action. All 
operations on the table are to be performed by the modules connected to the table output 
which is an OBC slave connection of array type.
Appendix F. Built-in Modules
F.28. Memory > Size [ ]
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 192


--- Page 193 ---

PROPERTIES
 edit the values in the table
▪
FP Precision controls the formal precision of the output connection
15.31 F.31. Macro
 
Provides a container for an internal structure. The number of inputs and outputs is not 
fixed and is defined by the internal structure.
PROPERTIES
▪
FP Precision controls the formal precision of the output connection
▪
Look changes between Large (label and port names visible) and Small (label and port 
names invisible) looks
▪
Pin Alignment controls the alignment of the ports in the outside view of the macro
▪
Solid controls the treatment of the macro by the core engine. If turned off the macro 
boundary is transparent for feedback resolution and possibly other things. Leave it ON 
unless you really, really know what you’re doing!
▪
Icon The Open File button loads a new icon for the macro, the File button clears the 
icon (no icon assigned)
Appendix F. Built-in Modules
F.31. Macro
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 193

