--- Page 16 ---

1
First Steps in Reaktor Core
 
1.1
What is Reaktor Core
 
Reaktor Core is a new level of functionality within Reaktor with a new and different set of 
features. Because there is also an older level of functionality, we will hereinafter refer to 
these two levels as the core level and the primary level, respectively. Also when we say 
“primary-level structure” we will mean the structure of an instrument or macro, but not 
the structure of an ensemble.
The features of Reaktor Core are not directly compatible with those of the primary level, so 
some interfacing is required between them, and that comes in the form of core cells. Core 
cells exist inside primary-level structures, and they look similar and behave similarly to pri­
mary-level built-in modules. Here is an example structure, using a HighShelf EQ core cell, 
which differs from the primary-level built-in module version in that it has frequency and 
boost controls:
Inside of core cells are Reaktor Core structures. Those provide an efficient way to imple­
ment custom low-level DSP functionality as well as to build larger-scale signal-processing 
structures using such functionality. We will take a detailed look at these structures later.
Although one of the main purposes of Reaktor Core is to build low level DSP structures, it 
is not limited to that. For users with little DSP programming experience, we have provided 
a library of pre-built modules, which you can connect inside core structures, just as you do 
with ordinary modules and macros in primary-level structures. We have also provided you 
with a library of pre-built core cells, which are immediately available for you to use in pri­
mary-level structures.
First Steps in Reaktor Core
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 16


--- Page 17 ---

In the future, Native Instruments will put less emphasis on creating new primary-level mod­
ules. Instead, we will use our new Reaktor Core technology and provide them in the form of 
core cells. For example, you will already find a set of new filters, envelopes, effects, and so on 
in the core cell library.
1.2
Using Core Cells
 
 
The core cell library can be accessed from primary-level structures by right-clicking on the 
background and using the Core Cell submenu:
As you can see, there are all different kinds of core cells; they can be used in the same 
way as primary-level built-in modules.
An important limitation of core cells is that you are not allowed to use them inside event 
loops. Any event loop occurring through a core cell will be blocked by Reaktor.
You can also insert core cells that are not in the library. To do that, use the Load… com­
mand from the Core Cell menu:
First Steps in Reaktor Core
Using Core Cells
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 17


--- Page 18 ---

You may also want to save core cells you’ve created or modified, so that you can load them 
into other structures. To save a core cell, right-click on it and select Save Core Cell As:
First Steps in Reaktor Core
Using Core Cells
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 18


--- Page 19 ---

Rather than using the Load… command, you can have your core cells appear in the menu 
by putting them into the Core Cells subdirectory of your user library folder. Better still, you 
can further organize them into subgroups. Here’s an example:
“My Documents\Reaktor 5” is the user library folder in this example. On your computer 
there may be a different path, depending on the choice you’ve made during installation 
and any changes you’ve made in Reaktor’s preferences. Inside the user library folder 
there’s a folder named “Core Cells”. (Create it manually if it doesn’t exist.)
Inside the Core Cells folder, notice the folder structure consisting of the Effects, Filters, 
and Oscillators folders. Inside those folders are core cell files that will be displayed in the 
user part of the Core Cell menu:
First Steps in Reaktor Core
Using Core Cells
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 19


--- Page 20 ---

The menu contents are scanned once during Reaktor startup, so after putting new files in­
to these folders, you should restart Reaktor.
Empty folders are not displayed in the menu; a folder must contain some files to be dis­
played.
Under no circumstances should you put your own files into the system library. The system 
library may be changed or even completely replaced when installing updates, in which 
case your files will be lost. The user library is the right place for any content that is not 
included in the software itself.
1.3
Using Core Cells in a Real Example
 
 
Here we are going to take a Reaktor instrument built using only primary-level modules and 
modify it by putting in a few core cells. In the Core Tutorial Examples folder in your Reak­
tor installation, find the One Osc.ens ensemble and open it. This ensemble consists of on­
ly one instrument, which has the internal structure shown:
First Steps in Reaktor Core
Using Core Cells in a Real Example
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 20


--- Page 21 ---

As you can see this is a very simple subtractive synthesizer consisting of one oscillator, 
one filter and one envelope. We are going to replace the oscillator with a different, more 
powerful one. Right-click on the background and select Core Cell > Oscillator > MultiWave 
Osc:
The most important feature of this oscillator is that it simultaneously provides different an­
alog waveforms that are locked in phase. We are going to replace the Sawtooth oscillator 
with the MultiWave Osc and use a mix of its waveforms instead of a single sawtooth wave­
form. Fortunately, there’s already a mixer macro available from Insert Macro > Classic 
Modular > 02‑Mixer Mixer Amp > Mixer– Simple–Mono:
First Steps in Reaktor Core
Using Core Cells in a Real Example
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 21


--- Page 22 ---

Connect the mixer and the oscillator together and use their combination to replace the 
sawtooth oscillator:
Switch to the panel view. Now you can use the four faders of the mixer to vary the wave­
form mix.
Let’s do one more modification to the instrument and add a Reaktor Core-based chorus ef­
fect. We say Reaktor Core based, because although the chorus itself is built as a core cell, 
the part containing panel controls for this chorus is still built using the primary-level fea­
tures. That’s because at this time Reaktor Core structures cannot have their own control 
panels – the panels have to be built on the primary level.
Select Insert Macro > Building Blocks > Effects > SE‑IV Chorus and insert it after the
Voice Combiner module:
If you look inside the chorus you can see the chorus core cell and the panel controls:
First Steps in Reaktor Core
Using Core Cells in a Real Example
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 22


--- Page 23 ---

1.4
Basic Editing of Core Cells
 
 
Now we are about to learn a few things about editing core cells. We are going to start with 
something simple: modifying an existing core cell to your particular needs.
First, double-click the MultiWave Osc to go inside:
First Steps in Reaktor Core
Basic Editing of Core Cells
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 23


--- Page 24 ---

What you see now is a Reaktor Core structure. The three areas separated by vertical lines 
are for three different kinds of modules: inputs (on the left), outputs (on the right), and 
normal modules (center).
Whereas normal modules can move in all directions, the inputs and outputs can only be 
moved vertically, and their relative order matches the order in which they appear outside. 
So, you can easily rearrange their outside order by moving them around. Try moving the 
FM input below the PW input:
You can double-click the background now to ascend to the outside, primary-level structure 
and see the changed port order:
Now go back to the core level and restore the original port order:
As you have probably already noticed, if you move modules around, the three areas of the 
core structure automatically grow to accommodate all modules inside them. However, they 
do not automatically shrink, which can lead to these areas sometimes becoming unneces­
sarily large:
First Steps in Reaktor Core
Basic Editing of Core Cells
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 24


--- Page 25 ---

You can shrink them back by right-clicking on the background and selecting Compact 
Board command:
Now that we have learned to move the things around and rearrange the port order of a core 
cell, let’s try a few more options.
For a core cell that has audio outputs it’s possible to switch the type of its inputs between 
audio and event (a more detailed explanation can be found later in this manual). In the 
above example, we used a MultiWave Osc module, all of whose inputs and outputs are au­
First Steps in Reaktor Core
Basic Editing of Core Cells
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 25


--- Page 26 ---

dio. However, in this example we don’t really need them as audio, because the only thing 
connected to the oscillator is a pitch knob. Wouldn’t it be more CPU efficient to have at 
least some of the ports set to event type? The obvious answer is, “yes, it would.” Here’s 
how to do that.
Changing both P and PM inputs to event mode should produce the largest CPU improve­
ment. To do that double-click on the P port module to open its properties window:
Switch the properties window to the function page, if necessary, by clicking on the cog 
wheel tab. You should now see the Signal Mode property:
Change it to event. Note how the large dot at the left of the input module changes from 
black to red indicating that the input is now in event mode (it’s more easily visible after 
you deselect the port – just click elsewhere):
First Steps in Reaktor Core
Basic Editing of Core Cells
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 26


--- Page 27 ---

Now click on the PM input to select it, and change it to event mode, too. If you want, you 
can change the two remaining inputs to event mode as well. Finally, double-click the 
structure background to return to the primary level and observe that the port colors have 
changed to red and the CPU usage has gone down.
Sometimes it doesn’t make sense to switch a port from one type to another. For example, 
it doesn’t make sense to switch an input that receives a real audio signal (meaning real 
audio, not just an audio-rate control signal like an envelope) to an event rate. In some cas­
es such switching could even ruin the functionality of the module. Going in the other di­
rection, it doesn’t make sense to change an event input that is really event sensitive, such 
as an envelope’s event trigger input (for example, gate inputs of Reaktor primary-level en­
velopes). If you change such an input to audio, it will no longer work correctly.
In addition to cases in which port-type switching obviously does not make sense there may 
be cases in which it does make sense, but in which the modules will not work correctly if 
you switch their port types. Such cases are quite special, although they can also result 
from mistakes in the implementation or design of the module. Generally, port-type switch­
ing should work; hence the following switching rule:
In a well designed core cell, an audio-rate control input can typically be switched to event 
mode without any problem. An event input can be switched to audio only if it doesn’t have a 
trigger (or other event-sensitive) function.
Another way to save CPU is to disconnect the outputs that you don’t need, thereby deacti­
vating unused parts of the Reaktor Core structure. You have to do that from inside the 
structure – outside connections do not have any effect on deactivating the core structure 
elements.
Suppose in our example we decide that we only need the sawtooth and pulse outputs. We 
can lower the CPU usage by going inside the MultiWave Osc and disconnecting the unused 
outputs. Disconnecting is simple in Reaktor Core, you click on the input port of the con­
First Steps in Reaktor Core
Basic Editing of Core Cells
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 27


--- Page 28 ---

nection, drag the mouse to the any empty part of the background and release it. For exam­
ple, click on the input port of the Tri output and drag the mouse into empty space on the 
background.
There’s another way to delete a connection. Click on the wire between the sine output of 
the MultiWave Osc and Sin output of the core cell, so that it gets selected (you can tell 
that it’s selected by its blue color):
Now you can press the Delete key to delete the wire:
After you deleted both wires, the CPU meter should go down a little more.
If you change your mind, you can reactivate the outputs by clicking on either the input or 
the output that you want to reconnect and dragging the mouse to the other port. For exam­
ple, click on the Tri output of the MultiWave Osc and drag to the input of the Tri output 
module. The connection is back:
First Steps in Reaktor Core
Basic Editing of Core Cells
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 28


--- Page 29 ---

Of course, numerous fine-tuning adjustments can be made to core cells. You will learn 
about many more options as you proceed through this manual.
First Steps in Reaktor Core
Basic Editing of Core Cells
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 29

