--- Page 71 ---

3
Reaktor Core Fundamentals: The Core Signal Model
 
3.1
Values
 
Most of the outputs of Reaktor Core modules produce values. (Producing a value means 
that at any moment in time there is a value associated with the output.) The values are 
available to all modules whose inputs are connected to those outputs.
In the following example an adder module gets values 2 and 3 from the two modules 
whose outputs are connected to its inputs, and it produces a value of 5 at its output.
If you want to draw an analogy to the hardware world you can think of values as signal levels 
(voltages), especially with relatively large-scale modules such as oscillators, filters, envelopes, 
and so on. However, values are not limited to those kinds of processing—they are just values 
and can be used to implement any processing algorithm, not just voltage-modeling algorithms.
3.2
Events
 
Time is not continuous in the digital world; it is discrete. Probably the most familiar exam­
ple of this is that a digitally stored recording doesn’t store the full information about an 
audio signal, which is continuously changing over time, but rather stores only information 
about the signal level at regularly spaced points in time. The number of points per second 
bears the famous name of sampling rate.
Here is a picture of a continuous signal:
Reaktor Core Fundamentals: The Core Signal Model
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 71


--- Page 72 ---

and its digital representation:
Because we are in the digital world, the outputs of our modules cannot change values con­
tinuously. On the other hand, we don’t have to limit ourselves to changing values at regu­
larly spaced points in time. For one thing, we do not have to maintain a particular sam­
pling rate all over our structures. For another thing, in certain areas of our structures we do 
not even have to maintain any sampling rate at all; that is, our changes do not have to 
happen at regular intervals.
For example, at time zero the output of our adder could have a value of 5. The first change 
could occur at time 1 ms (one millisecond). The second change could occur at 4 ms. The 
third at 6 ms:
Reaktor Core Fundamentals: The Core Signal Model
Events
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 72


--- Page 73 ---

In the picture above we can see changes of the output of our adder occurring during the 
time from 0 to 7 ms. At the moment in time that the output changes its value, it generates 
an event. An event means that the output reports a change of its state, meaning that it has 
got a new value.
In the following example, the upper left module has changed its output value from 2 to 4, 
generating an event. In response, the adder module will change its output value and gen­
erate an event at its output, too.
Alternatively, the upper left module could have generated a new event with the same value 
as the old one. The adder would have still responded by generating a new event, but this 
time, without changing its output value.
Reaktor Core Fundamentals: The Core Signal Model
Events
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 73


--- Page 74 ---

The new value appearing at the output is not required to be different from the old one. Howev­
er, the only way an output can change its value is by generating an event.
As you have seen from the previous examples, an event occurring at an output of some 
module will be sensed by downstream modules, which would in turn produce further 
events (remember the adder producing an output event in response to an incoming event). 
Those new events would be sensed by the modules connected to the corresponding out­
puts and propagated further downstream, until the propagation stops for one of the rea­
sons discussed later in this text.
Events in Reaktor Core are not the same as events on the Reaktor primary level. They behave 
according to different rules, which will be explained below.
3.3
Simultaneous Events
 
Consider the situation in which the two modules on the left side in the previous examples 
simultaneously produce an event.
Reaktor Core Fundamentals: The Core Signal Model
Simultaneous Events
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 74


--- Page 75 ---

This is one of the key features of the Reaktor Core event model—events can occur simulta­
neously at several places. In that situation, the events originating at both the left-side 
modules will arrive at the inputs of the adder simultaneously, and most importantly, the 
adder will produce exactly one output event in response.
That is not the same as on the Reaktor primary level, where events cannot happen simultane­
ously, and the Add module (in event mode) would produce two output events in such a situa­
tion.
Of course, in reality, the events are not produced simultaneously by the upper-left and the 
lower-left modules, because both modules are being processed by the same CPU, and the 
CPU can process only one module at a time. But, what is important for us, is that these 
events are logically simultaneous, that is they are treated as simultaneous by the modules 
receiving them.
Here is another example of simultaneous event propagation:
In the example above, the leftmost module is sending an event, changing its output value 
from 2 to 3. The event is sent simultaneously to both the inverter (–x) and the multiplier 
(*) modules. In response to the incoming event the inverter will produce a new output val­
ue –3. It is important to notice that although the output event of the inverter was pro­
duced in response to the event sent by the leftmost module, and as such should happen 
later than the incoming event, both events are still logically simultaneous. That means 
they simultaneously arrive at the inputs of the multiplier, and the multiplier again produ­
ces only one output event, with a value of –9.
Again, on the primary level you would have had two events at the output of the Event Mult 
module. It is also not defined whether the event at the output of the leftmost module would 
have been sent first to the inverter or to the multiplier (although that is irrelevant for the given 
structure).
Reaktor Core Fundamentals: The Core Signal Model
Simultaneous Events
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 75


--- Page 76 ---

In general you can use the following rule to figure out whether two events are simultane­
ous or not:
All events originating from (sent in response to) the same event are simultaneous. All events 
originating from an arbitrary number of simultaneous events (occurring at different outputs, 
but known to be simultaneous) are also simultaneous.
The last example shows the benefit of having simultaneous events. In that case, we elimi­
nate the redundant processing of the second event by the multiplier, which would have 
taken extra CPU time. In longer structures, in the absence of simultaneous events, the 
number of events can grow uncontrollably unless the structure designer pays particular at­
tention to keeping the number of duplicate events low.
In addition to saving CPU time, the concept of simultaneity leads to important differences 
in one’s approach to structure construction, especially for the structures implementing 
low-level DSP algorithms. You will become more familiar with these differences as you 
start constructing your own structures.
3.4
Processing Order
 
As you have seen from the previous examples, when a module sends an event, the down­
stream modules respond to that event. From that, one might conclude that, despite pro­
ducing logically simultaneous events, the modules are definitely not processed simultane­
ously. One might further conclude that, for a given connection, it would be reasonable to 
process the upstream module of the connection before the downstream module of the con­
nection. All those conclusions are, in fact, correct.
The general rule of processing order of the modules is:
If two connected modules are processing logically simultaneous events, then the upstream 
module will be processed first. If the events are not simultaneous, then of course, the order of 
processing for the modules is the order of the processed events.
From the above rule it follows that as long as there is a one-direction connection path (al­
ways upstream or always downstream) between two modules, then there is a defined proc­
essing order for these two modules: the upstream module is processed first.
Reaktor Core Fundamentals: The Core Signal Model
Processing Order
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 76


--- Page 77 ---

If there is no one-direction connection path between two modules, their processing order rela­
tive to each other is undefined for logically simultaneous events. That means that the order is 
arbitrary and can change as a result of various actions. The structure designer must take care 
that such situations occur only for modules whose relative processing order is unimportant. 
That is normally automatically the case as long as no OBC connections (see below) are in­
volved.
Here is an example, the digits showing the order of module processing:
For the above structure, there is an alternative valid processing order:
There is no way to tell which one will be taken by the software. Fortunately, as long as you 
do not use OBC connections, the relative order of modules in such cases is really unimpor­
tant.
The above rules for processing order cannot be applied if there is feedback in the structures, 
because in that case, for any pair of modules in the feedback loop we cannot tell which one is 
upstream to the other. The problem of handling feedback loops, including the processing or­
der, will be addressed later.
Reaktor Core Fundamentals: The Core Signal Model
Processing Order
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 77


--- Page 78 ---

For the above structure, it is not possible to define whether, for example, module B is up­
stream to module D or vice versa, because there is an upstream connection going from D 
to B as well as an upstream connection going from B to D (via E).
3.5
Event Core Cells Reviewed
 
 
Let’s take a look at event core cells from the point of view of the just described event con­
cept of Reaktor Core.
As you’ll remember, event core cells have event inputs and event outputs. These inputs 
and outputs are the interface between Reaktor’s primary level and the Reaktor Core level; 
they perform the conversion between primary-level events and core events, and vice versa. 
The rules of the conversion are as follows:
▪
Event Inputs send core events to the inside of the structure in response to primary-level 
events coming from outside. Because the outside primary-level events cannot arrive 
simultaneously at the inputs, the internally produced events also do not occur simul­
taneously.
▪
Event Outputs send primary-level events to the outside of the structure in response to 
core events coming from the inside. Although core events can occur simultaneously at 
several outputs, primary-level events cannot be sent simultaneously. Therefore, for si­
multaneous core events, the corresponding primary-level events will be sent one after 
another, with upper outputs always sending before lower ones.
Reaktor Core Fundamentals: The Core Signal Model
Event Core Cells Reviewed
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 78


--- Page 79 ---

Let’s try that in practice by building an event processing module that performs signal 
shaping according to the formula: y = 0.25*x*(4-|x|)
The graph of this function looks as follows:
Let’s start by creating a new event core cell with one input and one output, labeled “x” 
and “y”, respectively.
Now let’s create the structure which computes the formula. We need to create |x| (absolute 
value), - (subtract), and two * (multiply) modules in the normal area. These are not core 
macros, but rather true Reaktor Core built-in modules. To insert built-in modules into core 
structures, right-click in the background of the normal area and select the Built‑In Module
submenu:
Reaktor Core Fundamentals: The Core Signal Model
Event Core Cells Reviewed
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 79


--- Page 80 ---

You’ll find all the necessary modules in the Built‑In In Module > Math submenu:
We’ll need two constant values: 0.25 and 4. We could use QuickConsts exactly like we did 
earlier, but we can also insert real constant modules: Built‑In Module > Const (as with the
QuickConst, their values can be specified in the Properties window):
Reaktor Core Fundamentals: The Core Signal Model
Event Core Cells Reviewed
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 80


--- Page 81 ---

Of course, in this particular case there is no benefit in using Const modules instead of 
QuickConsts, but sometimes you might want to. For example, if the same constant has to 
be connected to multiple inputs, it may be better to use a Const module, because then 
you need only one of them and you also have a single place to edit the value.
The above structure now shapes the signal in the way described, but as we’ll see at the 
end of this section, the implementation is not perfect. For now, let’s give our module a 
name and go back to the primary level:
Now let’s test it. Set the number of voices for the Reaktor instrument to 1, so that it will 
be easier to use a Meter module:
Reaktor Core Fundamentals: The Core Signal Model
Event Core Cells Reviewed
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 81


--- Page 82 ---

Create a Knob and a Meter and connect them to the input and output of your module:
Set up the properties for the knob and the meter. Don’t forget to set the meter to display 
its value:
Reaktor Core Fundamentals: The Core Signal Model
Event Core Cells Reviewed
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 82


--- Page 83 ---

and to check the Always Active box:
Reaktor Core Fundamentals: The Core Signal Model
Event Core Cells Reviewed
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 83


--- Page 84 ---

Now move the knob and watch the output value change.
The event-shaper structure we’ve built should work perfectly for shaping control signals, 
but it still has one minor flaw in its event-processing behavior. We will return to that prob­
lem and fix it a little bit later.
Reaktor Core Fundamentals: The Core Signal Model
Event Core Cells Reviewed
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 84

