--- Page 30 ---

2
Getting Into Reaktor Core
 
2.1
Event and Audio Core Cells
 
 
Core cells exist in two flavors: Event and Audio. Event core cells can receive only primary-
level event signals at their inputs and produce only primary-level event signals at their out­
puts in response to such input events. Audio core cells can receive both event and audio 
signals at their inputs but provide only audio outputs:
Flavor
Înputs
Outputs
Clock Src
Event
Event
Event
Disabled
Audio
Event/Audio
Audio
Enabled
Therefore audio cells can implement oscillators, filters, envelopes, effects and other stuff, 
while event cells are suitable only for event processing tasks.
The HighShelf EQ and MultiWave Osc modules that you are already familiar with are ex­
amples of audio core cells (you can tell that by the fact that they have audio outputs):
And here is an example of an event core cell:
This module is a parabolic shaper for control signals, which can be used to implement ve­
locity curves or LFO signal shaping, for example.
Getting Into Reaktor Core
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 30


--- Page 31 ---

As previously mentioned, event core cells are restricted to event processing tasks. Because 
clock sources are disabled inside them (see the table above), they cannot generate their 
own events and, therefore, cannot implement modules such as event-rate LFOs and enve­
lopes. When you need such modules, we suggest that you take an audio cell and convert 
its output to event rate using one of the primary-level audio to event converters:
2.2
Creating Your First Core Cell
 
 
You create new core cells by right-clicking on the background in a primary-level structure 
and selecting Core Cell > New Audio or, for event cells, Core Cell > New Event:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Creating Your First Core Cell
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 31


--- Page 32 ---

We are going to build a new core cell from scratch inside the same One Osc.ens you al­
ready played with. We will be using the modified version of that ensemble with the new 
oscillator and chorus that we built in the last chapter, but if you didn’t save it don’t worry, 
you can do the same steps using the original One Osc.ens.
As you can see, in this ensemble we are modulating the filter at the P input, which ac­
cepts only event signals. We are not using the FM version of the same filter because it 
does not perform as well at higher cutoff frequencies, and because the modulation scale is 
linear at an FM input, which generally gives less musical results when modulated by an 
envelope. (That phenomenon is typically but incorrectly referred to as “slow envelopes”.):
Because we need to apply the modulation at an event input, we also need to convert the 
envelope’s output to an event signal, which we do with an A/E converter. As a result, our 
control rate is pretty low. Of course we could have used a converter running at a signifi­
cantly higher rate (and eating up significantly more CPU), but what we are going to do in­
stead is replace this filter with one which we build as a core cell. Alternatively, we could 
have taken an existing filter from the core-cell library, but then we would miss all the fun 
of making our first Reaktor Core structure.
We’ll start by creating a new audio core cell. Select Core Cell > New Audio and an empty 
audio core cell will appear:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Creating Your First Core Cell
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 32


--- Page 33 ---

Double-click it to see its structure, which is obviously empty. As you surely remember, the 
three areas are meant for input, output, and normal modules:
Attention: we are going to insert our first module into a core structure right now! Right-
click in the normal area to bring up the module creation menu:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Creating Your First Core Cell
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 33


--- Page 34 ---

The first submenu is called Built‑In Module and provides access to the built-in modules of
Reaktor Core, which are generally meant to do really low-level stuff and will be discussed 
later.
The second submenu is called Expert Macro and contains macros meant to be used along­
side built-in modules for low-level stuff.
The third submenu, called Standard Macro, is the one we want to use:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Creating Your First Core Cell
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 34


--- Page 35 ---

The VCF section could be promising, let’s look inside:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Creating Your First Core Cell
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 35


--- Page 36 ---

Let’s try Diode Ladder:
Well, maybe that was not the best idea, because a diode ladder might sound significantly 
different from the primary-level filter module we are trying to replace. At minimum, Diode 
Ladder is a 4-pole (24dB/octave) filter, and the one we are replacing is a 2-pole filter 
(12dB/octave). To delete it there are two options. One is to right-click on the module and 
select Delete Module:
The other option is to select the module by clicking on it and pressing the Delete key.
After deleting the Diode Ladder, insert a 2 Pole SV C filter from the same VCF section of 
the Standard Macro submenu:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Creating Your First Core Cell
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 36


--- Page 37 ---

This is a 2-pole, state-variable filter and is similar to the one we are replacing (there are 
some differences, but they are quite subtle). What’s important is that we can modulate 
this filter at audio rates.
Obviously, we need some inputs and some outputs for our core cell. To be exact we need 
only one output – for the LP signal. To create it right-click in the outputs area:
There’s only one kind of module you can create there, so select it. This is what the struc­
ture is going to look like:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Creating Your First Core Cell
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 37


--- Page 38 ---

Double-click the output module to open the Properties window (if it’s not already open). 
Type “LP” in the label field:
Now connect the LP output of the filter to the output module:
Now let’s start with the inputs. The first input will be an audio-signal input. Right-click in 
the background of the inputs area and select New > In:
The input is automatically created with the right type – it’s an audio input, as you can tell 
by the large black dot. Rename this input to “In” in the same way you renamed the output 
to “LP”, then connect it to the first input of the filter module:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Creating Your First Core Cell
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 38


--- Page 39 ---

The second input is a little bit more complicated. As you can see, the second input of the 
filter Reaktor Core module is labeled “F”. That means frequency, and if you hold your 
mouse over that input for a while (make sure the info button, the cursor with the “i,” is 
active), you’ll see the info text, which says “Cutoff frequency (Hz)”:
As we know, the cutoff of our primary-level filter module is controlled by an input labeled 
“P”, and as you can see from the info text, the signal uses a semitone scale.
We obviously need to convert from semitones to Hz. We can do that either on the primary 
level (using the Expon. (F) module) or inside our Reaktor Core structure. Because we are 
learning to build Reaktor Core structures, let’s go for the latter option. Right-click in the 
background of the normal area and select Standard Macro > Convert > P2F:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Creating Your First Core Cell
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 39


--- Page 40 ---

As the name implies (and the info text states), this module converts between P (pitch) and 
F (frequency) scales – exactly what we need. So let’s create a second input labeled “P” 
and connect it using the P2F module:
That should do it, but wait! In our instrument we have a “P Cutoff” knob defining the base 
cutoff of the filter, and to that is added the modulation signal from the envelope, which we 
have to convert to an event signal on the primary level in order to feed it into the P input 
of the filter. Now that the conversion is no longer necessary, we can remove the A/E mod­
ule and plug the audio signal directly into the audio P input of our new filter. Although 
this approach is fine, let’s look at another way, just for fun.
We’ll start with our P input in event mode and add another modulation input in audio 
mode. (If you remember our discussion about slow envelopes, you will understand why we 
decided to call this input “PM”, not “FM”.) We also need to have the modulation input 
use the semitones (pitch) scale. That’s exactly how it was done in our original instrument: 
we added our envelope signal to the “P Cutoff” signal and plugged the sum into the P in­
put.
So first change the P input to the event mode (as described previously) and add another 
PM input, which should be in audio mode:
As a user of the Reaktor primary level, you probably expect us to add the two signals to­
gether now. In fact, we could do that, but in Reaktor Core the Add is considered a low-
level module, and using it generally requires some knowledge of fundamental Reaktor Core 
low-level working principles. They are not that complex and will be described later in this 
text. For now, you don’t need to know them; just use a control signal mixer instead, for 
example, Standard Macro > Control > Ctl Mix:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Creating Your First Core Cell
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 40


--- Page 41 ---

The last input that we need is a resonance input, it doesn’t need to be at audio rate, so 
let’s use an event input:
One other thing we need to do is to give our core cell a name. If the Properties window is 
already open, click on the background to display the core cell’s properties. If it’s not open, 
right-click on the background and select the Owner Properties command:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Creating Your First Core Cell
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 41


--- Page 42 ---

Now you can type some text into the label field:
Double-click the background to see your result:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Creating Your First Core Cell
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 42


--- Page 43 ---

Wow, looks nice except that the audio-signal input is at the top of the core cell, while the 
primary-level filter module input is on the bottom. We could leave it as is, but it’s easy to 
fix, and you already know how. Let’s do it together, and we’ll show you a new feature on 
the way.
The first thing to do is go back inside and drag the audio-signal input all the way to the 
bottom:
That does the trick, but that diagonal wire over the whole structure doesn’t look particular­
ly nice. That’s what we are going to fix now.
Right-click on the output of the In input module and select the Connect to New QuickBus 
command:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Creating Your First Core Cell
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 43


--- Page 44 ---

This is what you should see now:
Also, the Properties window should open to display the properties of the QuickBus you’ve 
just created. The most useful QuickBus property is the ability to change its name (other 
properties are quite advanced, so don’t touch them for now). You can open the Properties 
window later by double-clicking on the QuickBus.
Although you can rename this QuickBus, we believe the current name is perfect, because 
it matches the name of the input connected to the QuickBus. (QuickBusses are local to 
the given structure, so you don’t need to worry about possible name conflicts when a 
neighboring or nested structure is using a QuickBus with the same name.)
The next thing you should do is right-click on the top input of the 2 Pole SV C filter mod­
ule and select Connect to QuickBus > In:
In the above menu “In” is the name of the QuickBus you are connecting to. You don’t 
want to create a new QuickBus, you want to connect to one that already exists, and that’s 
what you’re doing. This is how your structure should look now:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Creating Your First Core Cell
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 44


--- Page 45 ---

Instead of a nasty looking diagonal wire, we get two nice references, stating that the input 
and output are connected by a QuickBus whose name is “In”.
Now we can go back out to the primary level and modify our structure to use the new filter 
we’ve just built. The Add and A/E modules can be thrown away. This is our final result:
Takes quite a bit more CPU, doesn’t it? Well, don’t forget that this filter is modulated at 
audio rate in pitch scale. If you don’t like it, you can still revert to the old structure or use 
the Multi 2‑pole FM filter module from the primary level (slow envelopes, remember?), but
we hope that you do like it. Even if you don’t, there are quite a few other filters with new 
features that you might like better. And, if you don’t like the new Reaktor Core filters, 
there are a whole bunch of other Reaktor Core modules you can try.
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Creating Your First Core Cell
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 45


--- Page 46 ---

2.3
Audio and Control Signals
 
Before we proceed we need to take a look at one particular convention used in the Stand­
ard Macros of the Reaktor Core library. The modules you find in that area are best descri­
bed in terms of several different types of signals: audio, control, event, and logic. We will 
explain event and logic signals a little bit later; for now we’ll concentrate on the first two 
types.
Audio signals are obviously signals which carry audio information. These include signals 
taken at the outputs of oscillators, filters, amplifiers, delays, and so on. Furthermore, mod­
ules such as filters, amplifiers, saturators, delays and the like would normally receive an 
incoming audio signal to process.
Control signals, on the other hand, do not carry audio, they are used to control other mod­
ules. For example, outputs of envelopes and LFOs as well as keyboard pitch and velocity 
signals do not carry any sound, but can be used to control a filter’s cutoff or resonance, or 
a delay line’s delay time, and so on. Correspondingly, a filter’s cutoff or resonance input 
port, or a delay’s time input port are intended to receive control signals.
Here is an example of a Reaktor Core filter module which you already know:
The upper input of the filter is for the audio signal to be filtered and, therefore, expects an 
audio-type signal. The F and Res inputs are obviously control type. The outputs of the fil­
ter carry different kinds of filtered audio, so all those signals are also audio type.
A sine oscillator module, on the other hand, has only a single control input (for the fre­
quency), and a single audio output:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Audio and Control Signals
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 46


--- Page 47 ---

And if we take a look at the Rect LFO module, it has two control inputs – for controlling 
the frequency and pulse width (the third input is of event type) – and one control output 
(because it would be used to control things like filter cutoff or VCA levels, and so on):
Some types of processing, mixing for example, make sense for both audio and control types of 
signals. In those cases, you will find versions of such macros dedicated to processing audio 
and versions dedicated to processing control signals. For example, there are audio mixers and 
control mixers, audio amplifiers and control amplifiers, and so on. Generally it’s not a very 
good idea to misuse a module to process signals of types it was not intended for, unless you 
really know what you’re doing.
Having said that, quite often it’s possible to use audio signals for control purposes. The most 
common example would be to modulate an oscillator’s frequency or a filter’s cutoff by an au­
dio signal. That is absolutely OK because you are intending to use an audio signal as a control 
signal. We assume that the opposite case, in which you really mean to use a control signal as 
an audio signal, would be pretty rare.
The separation between audio, control, event, and logic signals is not to be confused with 
event/audio separation on the Reaktor primary level. The primary-level event/audio classifi­
cation refers to speed of processing, audio signals being processed faster and requiring 
more CPU. Also as you probably know, primary-level event signals have different propaga­
tion rules than audio signals. The difference between audio, control, and event signals in 
Reaktor Core terminology is purely semantic, defining the meaning of the signal rather 
than the type of processing. There is not a one-to-one relationship between primary-level 
event/audio and Reaktor Core audio/control/event/logic terms, but we can still try to ex­
plain their relationship:
▪
A primary-level audio signal normally corresponds to either a Reaktor Core audio sig­
nal (for example, an output of an oscillator or an audio filter) or a Reaktor Core con­
trol signal (for example, an output of an envelope).
▪
A primary-level event signal is typically a control signal in terms of Reaktor Core. An 
example of such signal would be an output of an LFO, a knob, or a MIDI pitch or ve­
locity source.
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Audio and Control Signals
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 47


--- Page 48 ---

▪
Sometimes a primary-level event signal corresponds to a Reaktor Core event signal. 
The most typical example of that is a MIDI gate (Reaktor Core event signals will be 
described later, as we promised).
▪
Sometimes a primary event signal resembles a Reaktor Core logic signal; however, 
they are not fully compatible, and there must be explicit conversion between them (a 
topic that also will be covered later). Examples include signals processed by Logic 
AND or similar primary-level modules.
It’s important to understand that when you select the type for a core-cell input port, you are 
choosing between the primary-level event and audio signals, not between Reaktor Core event 
and audio signals. The core-cell ports are the place where both worlds meet, and therefore, 
they use a bit of the primary-level terminology.
We are going to learn a little bit more about this concept while trying to build a tape-echo-
effect emulation. We will start by building a simple digital echo, then enhance it to emu­
late some features of a tape echo.
Start by creating an empty audio core cell; then go inside and set its name to “Echo”.
The first module we are going to put into the structure is a delay module. We will pick a 4-
point interpolating delay, because it has better quality than a 2-point delay, and a non-
interpolating delay would not be suitable for our tape emulation: Standard Macro > Delay 
> Delay 4p:
We obviously need an audio input and an audio output for our delay core cell. We will use 
a QuickBus connection for the input and a normal connection for the output:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Audio and Control Signals
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 48


--- Page 49 ---

We also need an event input for controlling the delay time. One thing to be aware of here 
is that, on the primary level, the delay time is usually expressed in milliseconds, while Re­
aktor Core library delay macros expect it to be in seconds. No problem, there is a conver­
sion module available for that. Standard Macro > Convert > ms2sec:
So far, we only have a single echo, and it would also be nice to hear the original signal, 
not just the echo. To get the original signal at the output we need to mix it with the de­
layed signal. Because we are mixing audio signals here, we need to use an audio mixer 
(you may remember we used a control mixer to mix control signals when we were building 
a filter core cell). Even better, we can use a particular audio mixer type that is specifically 
designed to crossfade between two signals: Standard Macro > Audio Mix-Amp > XFade 
(par):
Here “(par)” stands for parabolic, which produces a more natural sounding crossfade than 
a linear crossfade. We will connect the control (x) input of the crossfade to a new event 
input to control the mix between the dry (unprocessed) and wet (delayed) signals. When 
the control signal is 0 we will hear only the original signal, and when it’s 1, we will hear 
only the delayed signal:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Audio and Control Signals
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 49


--- Page 50 ---

Now we can hear the original signal and the echo, but there’s still only one echo. To have 
multiple echoes we need to feed a fraction of the delayed signal back to the delay input. 
First we need to attenuate the delayed signal. Following the same guidelines, use an audio 
amplifier to attenuate an audio signal by choosing Standard Macro > Audio Mix‑Amp >
Amount.
We use the Amount amp because we want to control the amount of the signal that is fed 
back. Also, this amplifier will allow us to invert the signal by using negative amount set­
tings. In contrast, for example Amp (dB), which would be quite suitable to control the sig­
nal volume, is not very good here because it doesn’t allow us to invert signals. We connect 
the amplitude control input of the amplifier to an event input controlling the feedback 
amount:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Audio and Control Signals
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 50


--- Page 51 ---

The reasonable feedback amount range is something like [‑0.9..0.9] here. When you try out
this delay, be careful with the feedback amount, because you can easily reach excessive sig­
nal levels (there is no saturation in our circuitry yet). We could have embedded a safety feed­
back amount clipper into our delay core cell, but because we are going to have saturation 
there a little bit later, we didn’t think that was necessary. Without it, you will be able to ex­
periment with high feedback levels and hear the delay saturating.
We need to mix the feedback signal with the input signal. An audio mixer (Standard Macro 
> Audio Mix‑Am Amp > Audio Mix) is a natural choice
You may wonder what happened to the upper input of the Amount module above, which 
now shows a large orange “Z”:
Actually, depending on the version of the software and other conditions, the Z sign could 
appear at some other input in the structure, but don’t worry you too much about it. The Z 
sign indicates that a digital feedback has occurred in the structure, and it is meant for ad­
vanced structure design, where such information can be an important hint for the struc­
ture designer.
For simple structures like the one above, one normally needn’t worry about the Z sign; its 
presence just shows that there will be a 1-sample delay (about 0.02ms at 44.1kHz, even 
less at higher sampling rates) at that point in the structure. We assume you won’t notice if 
your delay time is 0.02ms off the specified value.
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Audio and Control Signals
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 51


--- Page 52 ---

Let’s get back to our structure, which now can produce a series of decaying echoes. It is 
already a decent digital echo, but we want to show you a feature of the library that you can 
use as a trick to make your structure smaller.
Among the audio amplifiers are amplifiers called “Chain”. These amplifiers are capable of 
amplifying a given signal and mixing it with another, chained signal. One of them is the 
Audio Mix‑Amp > Chain(amount) amplifier, which works similarly to the Amount amplifier
except that it also does chained mixing:
The signal at the second input of this module will be attenuated according to the amount 
given at the A input and mixed with the signal at the chain (>>) input. The signal at the 
chain input is not attenuated. Such amplifiers can be used to build mixing chains, where 
the >> port connections constitute a mixing bus:
case we don’t need a mixing bus, but we can use this module to replace both our Audio 
Mix and Amount modules. The fed back signal will be attenuated by the amount specified 
by the Fbk input and mixed to the input signal exactly as it was before:
Congratulations, you have built a simple digital-echo effect. The next step is to add some 
tape feel to it.
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Audio and Control Signals
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 52


--- Page 53 ---

2.4
Building Your First Reaktor Core Macros
 
In the echo effect we just built, we used a Delay 4p macro from the library, which gives us 
a reasonably high-quality digital delay. But, high-quality or not, it still sounds too digital. 
We will make it sound warmer by adding two features found in tape delays: saturation and 
flutter.
Let’s start by deleting the delay macro from the structure and creating an empty macro in­
stead. Right-click on the background as select Built‑In In Module > Macro:
Double-click it to dive inside. You will see an empty structure, similar to the one you are 
diving from:
It also works similarly, but there are some important differences because the previous one 
was a structure of a Reaktor Core cell, whereas this one is an internal structure of a Reak­
tor Core macro. These differences have to do with the available input and output modules, 
which are different:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Building Your First Reaktor Core Macros
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 53


--- Page 54 ---

The Latch and Bool C types of ports will be explained much later in this manual and are 
used for advanced stuff. We are interested now only in the first type, which is called “Out” 
(or “In” for inputs). It’s a general type of port that can accept audio-, control-, event-, and 
logic-type signals. In fact, the port doesn’t care whether it’s audio, control, event, or logic; 
the difference is important only for you as a user, because it describes how the signal is to 
be used; for Reaktor Core they are all the same. There is also no difference between audio/
event inputs/outputs as on the previous structure level, because we don’t have Reaktor pri­
mary-level signals on the outside any longer, it is pure Reaktor Core now. The first thing 
we are going to do is name the macro, which is done in the same way as for core cells, by 
right-clicking on the background, selecting Owner Properties, and typing in the name:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Building Your First Reaktor Core Macros
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 54


--- Page 55 ---

The remaining properties of the macro control various aspects of its appearance and its 
signal processing.
While you are free to experiment with remaining properties as you see fit, we strongly advise 
against turning the Solid parameter off. We also advise changing the FP Precision sparingly. 
The meaning of these parameters will be described in the advanced topics of this manual.
The next thing is to create a set of inputs and outputs for our Tape Delay macro:
The upper input will receive the audio input, and the lower will receive the time parame­
ter. You may have noticed extra ports on the left side of the input modules; we will explain 
them a little bit later.
As the central part of our macro we will use the same Delay 4p module:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Building Your First Reaktor Core Macros
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 55


--- Page 56 ---

A simple emulation of the saturation effect can be done easily by connecting a saturator 
module before the delay. Saturator is a kind of signal shaper, so we will look for it among 
the audio shapers (because it is an audio saturator). Standard Macro > Audio Shaper > 
Parabol Sat:
The input signal will now 
be saturated within the range of –1..+1. Actually, the range is controlled by the L input of 
the saturator module, if it is disconnected it defaults to 1. That might be surprising to you 
because you are probably used to disconnected inputs being treated as if they receive no 
signal, or put differently, a zero signal. Well, this is not exactly the case in Reaktor Core 
structures—modules can specify special treatment for disconnected inputs. The saturator, 
for example, specifies the L input to have a default value of 1.
Now we are going to learn to do exactly the same, by specifying a new default value for our 
T input. Let’s say that if our T input is disconnected we would like it to be treated as if the 
input value was 0.25 sec. Very easy. Right-click on the port on the left of the T input mod­
ule and select Connect to New QuickConst. This is what you should see:
In addition, you should have the properties window displaying the properties of the con­
stant (if it shows a different page, press the cog wheel tab):
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Building Your First Reaktor Core Macros
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 56


--- Page 57 ---

In the value field type a new value of 0.25:
This is how the QuickConst should look now in the structure:
Let’s explain what we have just done. The port on the left side of the input module speci­
fies a so-called default signal. That means that if the input is not connected (on the out­
side of the macro), the default signal will be taken as the input source. In our case, if the 
T input of the Tape Delay macro is not connected on the outside, it will behave as if you 
have connected a constant value of 0.25 to it.
Of course, a connection to the QuickConst is not the only possible connection for the de­
fault signal input. You can connect it to any other module in the structure, including other 
input modules.
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Building Your First Reaktor Core Macros
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 57


--- Page 58 ---

Now that we have saturation and a default value for the T input, let’s emulate a tape flut­
ter effect. A simple way to do that is to modulate the delay time with an LFO. You could 
experiment with different LFO shapes for better flutter effect, but for now, just take one 
from the library: Standard Macro > LFO > Par LFO:
This is a parabolic LFO, which produces a signal similar in shape to a sine, but uses less 
CPU. Its F input must receive a signal specifying the oscillation rate. We can use a Quick­
Const again here. A rate of 4 Hz seems reasonable so we can try that:
The Rst input is used for restarting the LFO; we won’t need it for now.
Now we need to specify a modulation amount by scaling the output of the LFO. Currently 
the LFO output signal varies in the range –1 .. 1 and that is way too much. Because we 
are dealing with control signals here, we are going to use a control amount module, which 
is similar to the Amount amplifier we used for audio. Standard Macro > Control > Ctl 
Amount:
A modulation amplitude of 0.0002 should do fine, so we scale the signal to that amount:
Ultimately, we can mix the two control signals (one from the T input and one from the Ctl 
Amount module) and feed them into the T input of the delay module. The already familiar 
Ctl Mix module can be used for that:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Building Your First Reaktor Core Macros
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 58


--- Page 59 ---

Actually, we have a Chain type of control mixer that is similar to the mixer we have for au­
dio signals. We could use it to replace the Ctl Amount and the Ctl Mix modules in the 
same way we did earlier in the audio path. Standard Macro > Control > Ctl Chain:
As one last touch for our macro, we are going to change the buffer size for our delay, 
which defines the maximum possible delay time. If you hold your mouse cursor over the 
Delay 4p macro (provided the cursor info button for info popus on rollover is active), you 
can read in the hint text that the default buffer size corresponds to 1 sec of delay at 
44.1kHz:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Building Your First Reaktor Core Macros
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 59


--- Page 60 ---

Let’s increase the amount to 5 seconds (44,100*5 = 220,500 samples). Because each 
sample requires 4 bytes, we need 220,500*4 = 882,000 bytes, which is almost 1MB). 
Double-click on the Delay 4p macro:
The module on the left is the delay buffer module. Double-click it (or right-click and select 
Show Properties) to edit its properties. Select the cog wheel tab and you should see the 
Size property. Change it to 220,500 samples:
As we have seen, a delay buffer for 5 seconds of audio takes almost 1MB of memory, so be 
careful when changing delay buffers. That’s most important when the delays are used in poly­
phonic areas of the structure, because the size of the buffer will be multiplied by the number 
of voices.
Now we can go outside the Delay 4p macro and then outside the Tape Delay macro we’ve 
just created (double-click the background) and make the outside connections:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Building Your First Reaktor Core Macros
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 60


--- Page 61 ---

If you haven’t done so yet, try out the echo module now. Here’s a Reaktor primary-level 
test structure, as simple as possible (note that the Echo module is set to mono):
You might want to enhance it in various ways, for example, by providing knobs controlling 
the echo parameters, by using a real synthesizer as a signal source, and so on.
2.5
Using Audio as Control Signal
 
We have mentioned above that it is possible to use an audio signal as a control signal. As 
an example of that, we are going to create a Reaktor Core cell implementing a pair of os­
cillators, in which one modulates the other. Start by creating two multiwave oscillators:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Using Audio as Control Signal
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 61


--- Page 62 ---

We need pitch control for both of the oscillators, and we are going to listen to the output 
of the second one, so let’s create the necessary inputs and outputs:
Now we want to take the output of the left oscillator and use it to modulate the frequency 
of the right oscillator:
The Mod input controls the modulation amount.
Notice that we are mixing the modulation signal with the P1 input after a P2F converter so 
the modulation will take place in frequency scale. (It’s also possible to modulate in pitch 
scale.)
It’s also a good idea to scale the modulation amount according to the base oscillation fre­
quency:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Using Audio as Control Signal
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 62


--- Page 63 ---

If you analyze the above structure from the point of view of control and audio signals you 
will notice that all of the signals in the structure except the outputs of the oscillators are 
control signals. The outputs of both oscillators are obviously audio signals. Notice, howev­
er, that we are misusing the output of the left oscillator as control signal at the point at 
which we feed it into the Ctl Chain mixer.
2.6
Event Signals
 
 
As we said earlier, there are different meanings of the term event signal. You should al­
ready be familiar with the idea of Reaktor primary-level event signals. There are several 
ways of using a primary-level event signal. One is as a control signal (for example, LFO 
output, knob output, and so on), because it uses less CPU than a primary-level audio sig­
nal. In that case, you probably could achieve the same effect with an audio signal. But, 
there are also cases in which an audio signal won’t work for control, for instance, when you 
are interested in both the value of the signal and when the value is sent. A primary-level 
envelope-gate signal is an example of that, because the envelope will be triggered when 
the event arrives at the gate input.
When we were talking about audio, control, event, and logic signals in Reaktor Core we 
were not really talking about different types of signals (technically they are all the same in 
Reaktor Core). Rather we are talking about different ways of using a signal. As we now 
know, a Reaktor primary-level event signal can be used as a control, event, or even logic 
signal, and as we’ve seen from an earlier example, a Reaktor primary-level audio signal 
can be used as audio or control.
We have already learned to feed primary-level event signals into Reaktor Core structures 
and use them there as control signals. Event-mode inputs for an audio core cell imple­
menting a filter that we built earlier is a good example of that. There are also cases in 
which you would use an event core cell to process some primary-level event signals used 
as control signals. Here’s an example in which an event core cell wraps a control shaper 
core macro:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Event Signals
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 63


--- Page 64 ---

The control shaper receives an event rate control signal from the primary level (for exam­
ple, a MIDI velocity signal, or a primary-level LFO signal), bends it according to the Shp 
parameter, and forwards the result to the output.
An important restriction of event core cells, which we mentioned earlier, is that all clock sour­
ces are disabled inside them. That means that not only oscillators and filters, but also enve­
lopes and LFOs do not work inside event core cells. Those modules are restricted to receiving 
events from the primary level of Reaktor, processing them, and sending them back to the pri­
mary level, as in the above example.
Alternatively, signals derived from primary-level events can be used as true event signals 
inside Reaktor Core structures. Let’s take a look at a couple of simple cases of using 
events inside Reaktor Core.
The first case is using an envelope in a core structure. As you can guess from the disa­
bled-clock restriction on event core cells, this has to be an audio core cell. So, create a 
new audio core cell and choose Standard Macro > Envelope > ADSR:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Event Signals
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 64


--- Page 65 ---

The top input of the envelope is a gate input, which works similarly to the gate inputs of 
primary-level envelopes—that is, it opens or closes the envelope in response to incoming 
events. For that we create an event input for our core cell:
This input will translate the incoming primary-level gate events into the core events.
Now let’s take a look at the A, D, S, R inputs. The S (sustain level) input works similarly to 
the primary level; it expects the incoming signal to be in the 0 to 1 range:
The A, D, R inputs are different, however. Unlike primary-level envelopes they expect time 
to be specified in seconds:
That can be solved by using a Standard Macro > Convert > logT2sec, which converts the 
primary-level envelope times to seconds:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Event Signals
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 65


--- Page 66 ---

Although all inputs in the above structure are in event mode, the first input produces an 
event signal, whereas the others produce control signals.
Our envelope still has two unconnected ports. The GS port sets the gate sensitivity 
amount. At 0 the envelope completely ignores the gate level and is always at full ampli­
tude. At 1 the gate level has maximum effect, as on the Reaktor primary level. We can 
control this amount from the outside by adding another input:
The RM port specifies the retrigger mode for the envelope:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Event Signals
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 66


--- Page 67 ---

The look of this port is different from the others because it expects integer values, but that 
doesn’t mean we cannot connect non-integer signals to this port. We can simply use an­
other event input, and the incoming values will be rounded to the nearest integer:
Now let’s take a look at another example using a true event signal:
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Event Signals
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 67


--- Page 68 ---

The above structure implements a kind of pitch modulation effect. The effect is produced 
by a delay whose time varies in the range 250±100 ms. The rate of variation is deter­
mined by the Rate input, which controls the rate of the modulating LFO (the value is in 
Hz)—that is a pure control signal. The Rst input is a true event signal and can be used for 
restarting the LFO. The incoming value specifies the restart phase, where 0 would restart 
the LFO at the beginning of the cycle, 0.5 in the middle, and 1 in the end. You can try it 
out by connecting a button to send a specific value to this input.
2.7
Logic Signals
 
Now that we have learned about control and event signals, it’s time to learn about another 
way of using signals in Reaktor Core, that would be as logic signals. Here’s an example of 
a module that processes logic signals:
Notice that the ports of this module are integer type, just as was the RM input of the enve­
lope. That is because, generally, logic signals carry only integer values; more precisely, 
they carry only values of 0 and 1.
For logic signals, a value of 1 stands for true, and a value of 0 stands for false. The mean­
ing of “true” and “false” is, of course, up to the user; for instance, it could mean (as in 
the example here) whether a particular gate is open (true) or closed (false):
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Logic Signals
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 68


--- Page 69 ---

Here a Gate2L macro checks the incoming gate signal and produces a true (1) output if 
the gate is open and false (0) output if the gate is closed.
We can use logic signals to do logical processing. For example, here we’ve built a gate pro­
cessor that applies a regular clocked gate over a MIDI gate:
The Gate2L, AND, and L2Gate modules are logic modules and can be found in Standard 
Macro > Logic menu. The Gate LFO is a macro, which we’ve built for this processor; it 
generates an opening and closing gate signal at regular intervals.
The input gate and the output of the LFO are connected to Gate2L converters, which con­
vert the gate signals to logic signals, transforming open gates into true and closed gates 
into false. The AND module outputs a true signal only if both gates are in the open state at 
the same time. In other words the output of the AND module is true if and only if the user 
holds a key and at the same time the LFO outputs an open gate. That means that, as long 
as the user holds a key, there will be alternating true and false values at the output of the 
AND module, the speed of the alternation defined by the LFO rate. The output of the AND 
module is converted back to a gate signal, whose amplitude is taken from the gate input, 
thereby leaving the gate level unchanged. Here is the structure for our Gate LFO macro:
The F input defines the rate of the gate repetitions, and the W input defines the duration 
of open gates (at 0 they are 50% of the gate period, at –1 it’s 0%, and at 1 it’s 100%). 
The Rst input restarts the LFO in response to incoming events (hence the LFO is restarted 
each time there’s a gate event at the main gate input).
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Logic Signals
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 69


--- Page 70 ---

The module connected to the Rst input of the Rect LFO is called Value and can be found 
in Standard Macro > Event Processing. It ensures the LFO is restarted at zero phase by 
replacing the values of all incoming events by the value at its lower input, which is zero. 
The LFO output is converted into a gate signal by using a Ctl2Gate converter, also found in 
Standard Macro >Event Processing.
Remember, LFOs do not work inside event core cells. If you want to try out this structure, 
you’ll need to use an audio core cell.
Getting Into Reaktor Core
Logic Signals
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 70

