--- Page 107 ---

5
Audio Processing at Its Core
 
5.1
Audio signals
 
 
There is no special type for audio signals in Reaktor Core; audio signals are represented by 
events that, from the structure point of view, do not differ from any other event. What is 
different is that along the audio signal path the events are normally produced at regularly 
spaced time intervals, where the time between events is determined by the sampling rate.
To produce regularly spaced events (or for that matter, any events) we need some event 
source. As with event core cells, where the inputs of the module are the event sources, in 
audio core cells the inputs are also event sources. However, we now have an extra input 
type available:
▪
Audio Inputs repeatedly send core events to the inside of the structure at the rate de­
termined by the sampling rate setting of the outside primary-level structure. The 
events are sent simultaneously from all audio inputs of a core-cell structure.
▪
The audio inputs also send the initialization event to the core-cell structure. This 
event is sent regardless of what happens in the primary-level structure outside. How­
ever the value sent by these inputs during the initialization is dependent on the out­
side initialization process.
There is also a new output type which has to be used instead of event outputs.
▪
Audio Outputs deliver the last value received from the inside core structure to the out­
side primary-level structure. Because the audio outputs in the primary level do not 
send events, no events are sent to the outside.
Now we are going to rebuild the same shaper we built for events in audio mode. Therefore 
we create a new audio core cell. Generally we can use exactly the same structure, except 
instead of event inputs and outputs we will have audio inputs and outputs:
Audio Processing at Its Core
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 107


--- Page 108 ---

You may wonder why didn’t we use the modulation macros in this case? The reason is that 
we are processing audio signals here, and audio signals always send the initialization 
event, so it’s safe to do it this way. (You could use modulation macros if you prefer; it 
doesn’t really matter.)
We could also pack the above structure into a macro, which could be used inside other 
Reaktor Core structures for both audio and event processing. In that case, we better use 
modulation macros inside, because we don’t know in advance what kind of signal will be 
processed by the macro:
This is the inside structure of the audio core cell in that case:
To test it we are going to connect a sawtooth oscillator and an oscilloscope to it. An oscil­
loscope can be found under Insert Macro > Classic Modular > 00 Classic Modular – Dis­
play > Simple Scope (from a primary-level structure). Also don’t forget to make sure the 
number of voices for the instrument is 1.
We are using the external trigger for the oscilloscope for better synchronization at high dis­
tortion levels (the Ext button on the oscilloscope panel must be on for that to work). 
Change the range of the Ampl knob to something like 0 to 5 to be able to see the shaping.
Audio Processing at Its Core
Audio signals
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 108


--- Page 109 ---

5.2
Sampling Rate Clock Bus
 
A couple more features are needed for building audio structures. One is to be able to cre­
ate audio core cells with no audio inputs. (More precisely, we can create them, but what 
do we use as an audio event source?) Because many DSP algorithms need to know the cur­
rent sampling rate, the other feature we need is to be able to access that. Of course, we 
have included both features:
There is a special connection possibility available in every Reaktor Core structure called 
the “sampling rate clock bus”. The bus carries two signals: the clock and the rate.
▪
Clock is a signal source that sends regularly spaced events at the audio sampling rate. 
As do all standard audio signals, it also sends an initialization event. The values of all 
events are currently zero, but generally any structure using the clock signal should ig­
nore the values, because it may be changed in the future.
▪
Rate is a signal source whose value is always equal to the current audio sampling rate 
in Hz. The events are sent from this source during the initialization and whenever the 
sampling rate is changed.
You can access the sampling-rate bus by right-clicking on any signal input and selecting 
“Connect to SR.C” for clock signal or “Connect to SR.R” for rate signal.
Audio Processing at Its Core
Sampling Rate Clock Bus
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 109


--- Page 110 ---

The connection will be displayed next to the input:
The sample rate clock bus doesn’t work inside event core cells.
5.3
Connection Feedback
 
 
As we have already seen, the processing order rules cannot be applied if there are feed­
back connections within a structure. Therefore we need to provide additional rules, defin­
ing how feedback is handled.
The main rule is: Reaktor Core structures cannot handle feedback.
Well, not exactly so. You can make feedback connections in Reaktor Core; but because the 
Reaktor Core engine cannot handle structures with feedback, it will resolve them. Resolv­
ing the feedback means that the structure will be modified internally (you won’t see it on 
the screen) in a way that results in no feedback.
The reason that is necessary is that, in the digital world, feedback without delay is not 
possible. Normally there is a one-sample (minimum) delay in the digital audio feedback 
path, and that is what the Reaktor Core engine will do during feedback resolution—it will 
introduce a one-sample delay module (Z^-1) into the feedback path.
As you already know, places where implicit Z^-1’s have been introduced are indicated by 
the large orange Z displayed in place of the normal port icon:
Audio Processing at Its Core
Connection Feedback
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 110


--- Page 111 ---

We have already seen a structure built using a Read and a Write module that implements 
Z^-1 functionality. Let’s try putting that construction into our structure. We will put it on 
the wire where the automatic feedback resolution took place:
So, first we write, then we read (note that the Read module is clocked by SR.C to make 
sure that the reading is happening once per audio tick). That makes the read value always 
one audio sample behind the written one. Now there is no feedback in the structure. Don’t 
see it? OK, let’s move the modules around a little bit (we won’t change a single connec­
tion):
Do you see it now? Of course.
Audio Processing at Its Core
Connection Feedback
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 111


--- Page 112 ---

So, inserting an explicit Z^-1 module formally removes the feedback from the structure, 
while keeping it there logically (with a one audio sample delay).
Actually, the inside structure of a Z^-1 macro is a little bit more complicated than a pair of 
Read and Write modules. We will learn how and why in the next section.
You don’t have any control over the place where automatic feedback resolution will occur. 
It occurs on an arbitrary signal wire in the feedback loop. It is not even guaranteed that 
the resolution will always occur on a particular wire—it could change in the next version of 
the software, it could change in response to a change elsewhere in the structure, and it 
could be different the next time you load the structure from disk.
Hence, automatic feedback resolution is meant for the structures for which it’s not impor­
tant where exactly the resolution occurs. For example, such structures might be built by 
users who are not deep enough into DSP to understand these problems. Automatic feed­
back resolution allows them to still get reasonable results.
If you need to have precise control over feedback resolution points you can achieve that by 
explicitly inserting Z^-1 modules in your structures. These modules will formally explicitly 
eliminate the feedback and automatic resolution will not be needed.
Here is a version of the above structure with a Z^-1 macro inserted (it can be found in 
Expert Macro > Memory submenu):
As you can see, the big orange Z mark is gone now. Also note that the 1-sample delay 
point is different from the one which was automatically inserted (the automatic one was on 
the wire going from the Adder output to the Multiplier input and now it’s on the wire going 
from the Multiplier output to the Adder input).
Audio Processing at Its Core
Connection Feedback
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 112


--- Page 113 ---

The meaning of the second input of the Z^-1 module will be explained later. Typically you 
would just leave it disconnected.
Feedback on OBC and other types of non-signal connections (which will be introduced lat­
er) does not make any sense and, therefore, is not allowed. Should feedback loops occur 
that do not have any signal wires in them, one of the connections will be marked as invalid 
and considered not to exist. The Invalid mark is displayed as a big red X-shaped cross in 
the place of the port:
On the other hand, feedback loops with mixed types of the connections, are perfectly OK 
as long as they contain some normal signal wires in them; in that case they will be re­
solved in the normal way, with the resolution occurring on one of the normal signal wires:
In essence, this means that non-signal connections are never affected by feedback resolution, 
unless you make a completely non-signal feedback, which doesn’t make any sense.
5.4
Feedback Around Macros
 
In terms of feedback resolution, macros are generally treated in the same way as built-in 
modules.
Let’s consider a macro which just passes the incoming signal through to the output. Here 
is the internal structure of such a macro:
Audio Processing at Its Core
Feedback Around Macros
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 113


--- Page 114 ---

Now assume we build a feedback structure using this macro:
The feedback loop goes through two wires in the above structure and through another wire 
inside of the macro. Now where is the resolution going to occur? (OK, you can see in the 
above picture that is occurring at the adder input in this particular case, but we know it 
might as well have occurred at another point.)
Imagine for a moment that Thru was not a macro but a built-in module. In that case, it’s 
obvious that the feedback resolution could not occur within the module, it must occur out­
side.
Well, we are trying our best to make macros look and behave as if they were built-in mod­
ules. For that reason by default, the resolution of feedback loops will occur outside the 
macro. It’s not specified exactly where it will take place, but it will take place outside of 
the macro.
As a general rule, feedback resolution occurs on the highest structure level of the feedback 
loop.
However, you can change that behavior and allow feedback resolution to happen inside the 
macros. In fact, you should have wondered, if macros are treated the same as built-in 
modules, how can a Z^-1 macro resolve the feedback. Consider the following structure:
Audio Processing at Its Core
Feedback Around Macros
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 114


--- Page 115 ---

If macros and built-in modules are the same then nothing should change when we replace 
the multiplier by a Z^-1 macro:
But it is different, because the implicit feedback is now gone. There must be something 
special about the Z^-1 macro. And, in fact, there is.
If we look inside this macro we’ll see almost the same structure as the one we mentioned 
earlier to implement the Z^-1 functionality:
As you can see, the clock input of the macro is connected to the internal Read module. 
The default connection for this input is not to a zero constant, but the audio clock, and 
that’s what you would want in most cases. The module connected between the upper input 
and the write module will be explained later, for now just ignore it.
So far, there’s nothing special about this macro, except that it seems to implement the 
Z^‑1 structure we have discussed earlier. So how does the Reaktor Core engine know that
this structure is meant to resolve feedback loops? Obviously, the engine can know that it 
can resolve feedback loops, but how does it know that it’s intended to?
This is controlled by the Solid setting in the macro properties:
Audio Processing at Its Core
Feedback Around Macros
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 115


--- Page 116 ---

The Solid property tells the Reaktor Core engine whether the macro is to be considered as 
a solid built-in module for the purposes of feedback resolution or whether it is to be con­
sidered transparent. In 99% of the cases, you would want to keep this property on. That’s 
because you typically don’t want implicit feedback resolution to happen inside your mac­
ros.
One reason for that is that the resolution happening inside a macro won’t be visible unless 
you go into the macro, so that some of the implicit feedback delays can go unnoticed. For 
example, we can take our previous structure with the Thru macro and disable the Solid 
setting (make sure you are editing the Solid setting for the right macro, you can see it by 
the Thru text in the label field of the properties):
Audio Processing at Its Core
Feedback Around Macros
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 116


--- Page 117 ---

Now your outside structure probably still looks the same (we say probably because you 
never can be sure where exactly the automatic feedback resolution will happen):
But if you change your structure a little, connecting the output to another module, it could 
look like this:
Audio Processing at Its Core
Feedback Around Macros
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 117


--- Page 118 ---

Our feedback resolution delay seems gone. So in a larger and more complicated structure 
we could easily miss the fact that there’s an implicit delay. Where’s this delay gone? Of 
course, it’s now inside the Thru macro—the only place left which we cannot see from the 
outside:
Another reason for keeping the Solid property on is that with it off, in some cases the mac­
ro’s internal operation could change once it’s put in the feedback path. So please do your­
self a favor and turn the property off only if you build macros which are meant to resolve 
feedback. There won’t be many.
Now let’s return to the Z^-1 module. Because the Solid property is turned off for this mac­
ro, the boundary of this macro is completely transparent for feedback resolution. Thus the 
Z^-1 macro is not really treated as a built-in module and is capable of resolving feedback 
in the way described earlier in this text.
5.5
Denormal Values
 
The signal values in the structures that we have been building in the previous sections are 
represented inside the computer by a binary data type called floating point numbers or 
floats for short. Floats are an efficient representation for a wide range of values.
The term floating point numbers does not exactly specify how the numbers are represent­
ed. It just describes the approach taken to represent them, still leaving lots of freedom for 
implementation details.
The CPUs of today’s personal computer use the IEEE floating point standard. This stand­
ard defines exactly how the floating point numbers should be represented and what should 
be the results of operations on them (for example, how to handle limited precision issues, 
and so on.) In particular, this standard says that, for a group of particularly small floating 
point values, which because of limited floating point precision cannot be represented in 
the normal way, a special representation form is to be used. This other form is called “de­
normal” representation.
Audio Processing at Its Core
Denormal Values
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 118


--- Page 119 ---

Denormal representation for 32 bit float values is used roughly in the range from 10-38 to 10-45 
and from -10-38 to -10-45. Values less than 10-45 in absolute magnitude cannot be represented 
at all and are considered to be zero.
Because their representation is somewhat different from that of normal numbers, some 
CPUs have certain problems with handling these numbers. In particular, operations on 
these numbers can be performed much much more slowly (as much as 10 times or more) 
on some processors.
A typical situation in which denormal numbers appear for prolonged periods of time is in cal­
culating exponentially decaying values, as in filters, some envelopes, and feedback structures. 
In such structures, after the input signal reaches zero level, the output signal asymptotically 
decays to zero. Asymptotically means that the signal gets closer and closer to zero without ev­
er reaching it. In that situation, denormal numbers can appear and stay in the structure for 
relatively long time (until their absolute value falls below 10-45), and that can cause a signifi­
cant increase in CPU load.
Another situation in which denormal numbers may occur is when you change the precision of 
a floating point value from a higher precision (64 bit) to a lower precision (32 bit), because a 
value 10-41 is not a denormal in a 64 bit precision float but it is a denormal in a 32 bit preci­
sion float (changing the precision of floats is discussed later).
Let’s consider modeling an analog 1-pole lowpass filter with its cutoff set to 20 Hz. Our 
digital signal values will correspond to analog voltages (measured in volts). Let’s imagine 
that the input signal level was equal to 1V (volt) over a long enough period of time. Then 
the voltage at the filter output is also equal to 1V. Now we abruptly change the input volt­
age to zero. The output voltage will decay according to the law:
Vout=V0e-2πfct
where fc is the filter cutoff in Hz, t is time in seconds and Vo=1V (initial voltage).
Then the output voltage will change as follows:
▪
after 0.5 sec Vout ≈10-29 volt
▪
after 0.6 sec Vout ≈10-33 volt
▪
after 0.7 sec Vout ≈10-38 volt
▪
after 0.8 sec Vout ≈10-44 volt
Audio Processing at Its Core
Denormal Values
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 119


--- Page 120 ---

Oops, the numbers between 10-38 and 10-45 are in the denormal range. So in the time peri­
od from approximately 0.7 to 0.8 seconds, our voltage is represented by a denormal value. 
And it’s not only inside the filter. The filter output is probably further processed by the 
downstream structure, causing at least the few following modules also to deal with denor­
mal values.
At a sampling rate of 44.1 kHz, the time interval of 0.1 second corresponds to 4,410 
samples. Assuming that the typical ASIO buffer size is a few hundred samples, we have to 
produce several buffers at a significantly higher CPU load. Should the CPU load (per buf­
fer computation) get close enough to or exceed 100%, it will cause audio dropouts.
From the above text you need to draw one conclusion: denormal values are bad in real-time 
audio.
Reaktor primary-level modules are programmed in a way that generally prevents denormals 
from occurring inside them. Specifically, the DSP algorithms have been modified in a way 
that they generally shouldn’t produce any denormal values. If you are designing your own 
low-level DSP structures in Reaktor Core you also have to take care of denormals. To help 
you with that job we have introduced the Denormal Cancel module, available in Built‑In
Module > Math submenu:
Audio Processing at Its Core
Denormal Values
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 120


--- Page 121 ---

The Denormal Cancel module has one input and one output, and it tries to slightly modify 
the incoming value in a way that prevents denormals from occurring at the output:
The way this module modifies the signal is not fixed and may change from one software 
version to another, or even from one place in the structure to another. Currently it adds a 
very small constant to the input value. Because of precision losses, this addition does not 
modify values that are large enough (a value as large as 10-10 will not be modified at all), 
and because of the same precision losses, it is very unlikely that the result of addition can 
be a denormal value (in most of the cases it is probably even impossible).
If for whatever reason the Denormal Cancel module does not work for your structure, you are, 
of course, free to use your own denormal canceling techniques. But the problem may be that 
a technique that works on one platform sometimes may not work on another, whereas we are 
going to adapt the built-in DN Cancel algorithm to each supported platform. So whenever pos­
sible, try to use the DN cancel module. We will even consider building alternative algorithms 
into this module – feel free to discuss this with us on the support forum.
Some CPUs offer an option to violate the IEEE standard by disabling the production of denor­
mal numbers, forcing the denormal results to zero. Because Reaktor Core structures are meant 
to be platform independent, it’s strongly advised to always take care of denormal canceling in 
your structures, even if your particular system does not suffer from them.
Because one of the most typical situations for the denormals to appear are exponentially 
decaying feedback loops, and because most of feedback loops in audio processing are ex­
ponentially decaying (including but not limited to filters and feedback structures with de­
lays), we decided to build denormal canceling into the standard Z^-1 macro.
As you remember, the inside of this macro looks like this:
Audio Processing at Its Core
Denormal Values
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 121


--- Page 122 ---

Now you probably can tell what the Denormal Cancel module is doing in there. Because 
you would often use the Z^-1 macro inside feedback structures, there’s a good possibility 
of denormals occurring. We therefore decided to put the DNC module into the Z^-1 macro 
structure.
There’s another version of this macro called Z^-1 ndc which does not perform denormal 
canceling (ndc = no denormal cancel). You can use it in the structures that you are sure 
do not generate denormals (for example, FIR filters):
5.6
Other Bad Numbers
 
 
Denormal numbers are not the only kind that can cause problems in Reaktor Core struc­
tures with internal states, and particularly in feedback loops. Other examples include 
INFs, NaNs and QNaNs. We are not going to discuss those in detail here, because that 
information is available in other places, including the Internet. What’s important for us is 
preventing those kinds of numbers from appearing in our structures.
Generally, such numbers appear as the result of invalid operations. Division by zero is the 
easiest case. Other cases involve numbers getting too large to fit in the floating point rep­
resentation (that would be above 1038 in absolute magnitude), or outside the reasonable 
range for a particular operation.
Such numbers tend to get stuck inside structures, and in a way they are more sticky than 
denormals. For example as soon as you add a denormal value to another value which is not 
denormal, the result will be non-denormal (unless the other value is also very small and 
close to being a denormal). On the other hand if you add a normal value to an INF, the 
result will still be an INF.
Besides having a tendency to stick in structures forever (or better said, until the structure 
is reset), these numbers also have a bad habit of requiring much larger processing times 
on some CPUs. Therefore you should do your best to prevent them from being created at 
Audio Processing at Its Core
Other Bad Numbers
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 122


--- Page 123 ---

all. That means, for example, that whenever you divide two numbers you ensure that the 
denominator (the bottom part of the fraction) is not zero. The case of initialization requires 
particular attention here. For example, consider the following structure element:
If for whatever reason, the initialization event does not come on the lower input of the Di­
vider module, a division by zero will happen during initialization processing. In this case 
you might consider using a modulation delay macro instead, or depending on your particu­
lar needs find another solution.
5.7
Building a 1-pole Low Pass Filter
 
A simple 1-pole low pass filter can be built using a recursive equation:
▪
y=b*x+(1-b)*y-1 where
▪
x is the input sample,
▪
y is the new output sample,
▪
y-1 is the previous output sample, and
▪
b is the coefficient defining the filter’s cutoff.
The value of the coefficient b can be taken equal to the normalized circular cutoff fre­
quency, which can be computed using the following formula:
▪
Fc = 2*π*fc / fSR where
▪
fc is the desired cutoff frequency in Hz
▪
fSR is the sampling rate in Hz
▪
π is 3.14159…
▪
Fc is normalized circular cutoff (in radians)
In fact, the coefficient b is equal to the normalized cutoff only approximately, the error in­
creasing at high cutoff values, but it should be more or less OK for our purposes, especially if 
we do not need to have a precise setting of the cutoff frequency for our filter.
We start by creating an audio core cell with two inputs: one for the audio input and one for 
cutoff. We are going to use an event input for the cutoff in this version of the module.
Audio Processing at Its Core
Building a 1-pole Low Pass Filter
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 123


--- Page 124 ---

Actually, because we think it’s a good habit to build Reaktor Core structures as core mac­
ros to enhance their reusability, we a going to create our filter as a macro. So we create a 
new macro inside the structure and create the same inputs for that macro:
Now let’s build the circuitry for converting the cutoff frequency into the normalized circu­
lar cutoff:
6.28319 is 2*π, which is then divided by the sampling rate, forming the value to be mul­
tiplied with the cutoff frequency. We don’t need a modulation multiplier, because F logi­
cally is a control signal input, so we might perform the initial multiplication even if there 
is no initialization event at the F input.
We perform the division before the multiplication, because the division is relatively heavy on 
the CPU, and the sampling rate doesn’t change that often. If only the cutoff frequency 
changes, there are no events sent to the divisor module, and therefore, the division will not be 
performed. This is one of the standard optimizations that can be done by the core-structure 
designer.
Let’s build the circuitry implementing the filter’s equation:
Audio Processing at Its Core
Building a 1-pole Low Pass Filter
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 124


--- Page 125 ---

audio inputThe is latched just in case events at this input arrive asynchronously to the 
standard audio clock. That wouldn’t be necessary in the core-cell structure, where an au­
dio input is known to send events at correct times, but in a general core macro it is a very 
good practice.
Two modulation multipliers are used to prevent events at the F input (which generally 
speaking, can happen at any time) from triggering the computation in the feedback loop. 
Here it should be more clear why they are called modulation macros, in this case the cut­
off-derived signal is used to modulate gains in the feedback path.
Latching is a standard Reaktor Core technique to make sure that incoming events do not trig­
ger the computations at improper times. It’s also very widely employed in the form of modula­
tion macros and in other similar situations.
The Z^-1 module is used to store the previous output value and will automatically send an 
event with the previous output value on every audio clock tick. It also takes care of possi­
ble denormal values which otherwise could occur. Those familiar with DSP should notice 
that the structure looks pretty much similar to the standard DSP filter diagrams.
The Merge module at the adder output is making sure that the filter state after the initiali­
zation will still be zero, even if the input signal has a non-zero value.
Finally, we put the pitch to frequency converter into the core-cell structure and we are 
ready to test:
For testing we suggest using the following structure (don’t forget about the 1-voice setting 
for the instrument):
Audio Processing at Its Core
Building a 1-pole Low Pass Filter
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 125


--- Page 126 ---

The Cutoff knob should be set to the range 0 to 100 or something similar. Beware of too 
high cutoff values. Because of the increasing filter coefficient error at high cutoffs, the fil­
ter will become unstable with large cutoff values.
A better filter design should at least clip the cutoff values to the range where the filter is sta­
ble. For our case this could have been achieved by clipping the b coefficient to the range of 
0..0.99 or something similar. Techniques for value clipping will be described later in this text.
This is what you should see in the panel now:
Move the cutoff knob and watch the signal shape changing.
Audio Processing at Its Core
Building a 1-pole Low Pass Filter
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 126

