--- Page 127 ---

6
Conditional Processing
 
6.1
Event Routing
 
Events in Reaktor Core do not always have to travel along the same predefined paths. It is 
possible to dynamically change these paths. You can achieve this by using the Router 
module (Built‑In In Module > Flow > Router):
The Router module accepts events at its signal input (bottom) and routes them to either 
its output 1 (top) or its output 0 (bottom). The routing, i.e. whether the event goes to out­
put 1 or output 2, depends on the current state of the Router, which is controlled from the 
Ctl input (top)
The Ctl input accepts a connection of a new type, which is not compatible with either nor­
mal signals or OBC connections. It is a BoolCtl (Boolean control) signal type. The BoolCtl 
signal can be in one of two states: true or false (on or off, 1 or 0). If the control signal is in 
the true state the events are routed to output 1. If the control signal is in the false state 
the events are routed to output 0.
The control signals have a significant difference from normal signals in Reaktor Core: they do 
not transmit events and therefore cannot trigger any processing by their own.
To control a Router you obviously need a control signal source, the most common of which 
is the Comparison module found under Built‑In In Module > Flow > Compare:
This module performs a comparison of the two incoming signals and outputs the result as 
a BoolCtl signal. The upper input is assumed to be on the left of the comparison sign and 
the lower input, on the right. So a module reading ‘>’ produces a true control signal if the 
value at the upper input is greater than the value at the lower input.
You can change the comparison criterion in the properties of the module:
Conditional Processing
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 127


--- Page 128 ---

The available criteria are:
▪
= equal
▪
!= not equal (≠)
▪
<= less or equal (≤)
▪
< less
▪
>= greater or equal (≥)
▪
> greater
It is, of course, possible to connect several routers to the same comparison module, in which 
case they will change their state simultaneously.
The Router module splits the event path into two branches. Quite often these branches 
will later be merged:
Depending on the result of the comparison the above structure will either invert the input 
signal or leave it intact.
An alternative implementation of this structure would be:
Conditional Processing
Event Routing
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 128


--- Page 129 ---

In this version, the 0 output of the Router is disconnected; therefore, the Router works as 
a gate, letting the events through only if it’s in the ‘true’ state. The inverted value then 
arrives at the second input of the Merge, thus overriding the non-inverted value, which is 
always arriving at the first input. If the router is in ‘false’ state the inverter doesn’t receive 
an event and doesn’t send an event to the second input of the Merge; therefore, the origi­
nal unmodified signal goes to the output of the Merge.
The branches are most often merged with a Merge module. But theoretically speaking you 
could use many other modules (for example, arithmetic modules like adder, multiplier, and so 
on) instead.
Routers treat the initialization event just like any other event. Therefore, one could filter out 
the initialization event by using routers, thereby ensuring that the initialization event won’t ap­
pear in particular areas of the structure.
6.2
Building a Signal Clipper
 
Let’s build a Reaktor Core macro structure that would clip the incoming audio signal from 
the top at a specified level:
Conditional Processing
Building a Signal Clipper
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 129


--- Page 130 ---

If the input signal is not greater than the threshold it will be routed to output 0 of the 
Router and, through the Merge, to the output of the structure. Otherwise, the signal will be 
routed to output 1, where it triggers the latch, sending the threshold value to the Merge 
instead. The same thing happens during initialization.
Note that this structure will not change its output in response to changes to the threshold. 
Rather the new threshold value will be used for the next and all subsequent events at the sig­
nal input. This is in a way similar to a modulation macro’s behavior, where modulator changes 
do not result in output events.
Here is a testing structure for the clipper module we have built (an audio core cell has 
been used):
And this is what you should see in the panel:
In fact, there are a number of such “modulation” clipper macros found in the Expert Mac­
ro > Clipping menu.
Conditional Processing
Building a Signal Clipper
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 130


--- Page 131 ---

6.3
Building a Simple Sawtooth Oscillator
 
Let’s build a simple sawtooth oscillator, generating a sawtooth waveform with amplitude 1 
and a specified frequency. We will use the following algorithm: increment the output sig­
nal level at constant speed and at the moment the level becomes greater than 1 drop it by 
2.
Instead of dropping by 2 we could reset the level to –1, but that is generally not as good, be­
cause we won’t be able to precisely maintain the specified oscillator frequency.
The incrementing speed defines the oscillator frequency by the following equation:
▪
d = 2f / fSR
where d is the level increment per one audio sample, f is the oscillator frequency and fSR 
is the sampling rate. First we are going to build the circuitry for computing the increment­
ing speed:
Now we need the increment loop. It’s time to use a pair of Read and Write modules exact­
ly as we did in the accumulator:
The Read module triggers the level increment at each audio event. The sum of the old lev­
el and the increment is then compared against 1 and routed either directly to the result 
writing or to the wraparound circuitry.
The third input of the Merge module ensures that the oscillator is initialized to zero. Theo­
retically, the module that subtracts 2 from the signal level should have been a modulation 
macro, but we didn’t bother, because the Merge overrides the initialization result anyway.
Here’s the suggested test structure (don’t forget the P2F converter inside the core cell):
Conditional Processing
Building a Simple Sawtooth Oscillator
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 131


--- Page 132 ---

And here is the panel view:
Conditional Processing
Building a Simple Sawtooth Oscillator
 
REAKTOR 5.5 - Core Reference - 132

