--- Page 13 ---

2
Getting to Know REAKTOR
 
REAKTOR can be used in many different ways, from loading and playing pre-built Ensembles,
to building new Instruments using the Modules and Macros Library, to programming your own
DSP building blocks in Core. REAKTOR’s interface and file hierarchy are optimized to facilitate
all these use cases, offering clear workflows for the task at hand. This section gives an over-
view over the interface, the Play Mode and the Edit Mode, as well as the file types used in RE-
AKTOR.
2.1
The Interface at a Glance
 
REAKTOR's interface can be divided into three main areas:
The REAKTOR Interface
Getting to Know REAKTOR
The Interface at a Glance
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 13


--- Page 14 ---

(1) Toolbar: The area along the top is called the Toolbar and contains a lot of REAKTOR's glob-
al options and settings (see section ↑2.2, The Toolbar).
(2) Main area: The main area in the center displays either the loaded Instrument Panel, the
Structure of the Ensemble, or both (the area can be split with the options in the upper-right
corner).
(3) Side Pane: The area to the left is called the Side Pane and contains a number of different
functions categorized by tabs:
•
Browser (see section The Browser)
•
Snapshots (see section ↑6.3, Snapshots and Presets)
•
Connection Manager (see section ↑9.2, Connection Manager)
•
Panelsets (find more information in the Diving Deeper document)
•
Properties (find more information in the Diving Deeper document)
2.2
The Toolbar
 
The toolbar, located along the top of REAKTOR's interface, gives you access to many of the
main options and parameters in REAKTOR.
The toolbar in REAKTOR
(1) REAKTOR icon: Clicking on the REAKTOR icon opens a window displaying information about
the software. This window can be used to find the version number of your current REAKTOR
installation, which is located to the top left of the window.
Getting to Know REAKTOR
The Toolbar
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 14


--- Page 15 ---

(2) Open main menu: The arrow to the right of the REAKTOR icon opens the main menu. This
contains many different options and functions which are referenced throughout the documen-
tation.
(3) Show Side Pane: The magnifying glass button shows or hides the Side Pane. The Side Pane
hosts a variety of functions and settings, organized in tabs. See sections The Browser, ↑6.3,
Snapshots and Presets, and ↑9.2, Connection Manager for more information. The Panelsets
and Properties tabs are described in the Diving Deeper document.
(4) Toggle Edit Mode: The EDIT button toggles Edit Mode on or off. See section ↑2.3, Play
Mode vs Edit Mode for more information.
(5) Snapshot menu: The Snapshot menu is where you can browse and load Snapshots from the
loaded Ensemble. Snapshots are REAKTOR's main sound preset type and are explored in more
detail in section ↑6.3, Snapshots and Presets. Clicking on the Snapshot name opens the snap-
shot menu. The up and down arrows to the right of the menu can be used to cycle through the
sSnapshots.
(6) Transport: The transport controls are used to control the global playback. See section
↑2.2.1, Transport for more information.
(7) Show Sample Map Editor: The button with the waveform icon shows or hides the Sample
Map Editor. This button is only available if the loaded Ensemble contains a Sampler Module.
The Sample Map Editor is described in the Diving Deeper document.
(8) Show Player and Recorder: The button with the tape reel icon shows or hides the Player and
Recorder. The Player and Recorder utilities allow you to play back and record audio files. The
Player and Recorder are described in the Diving Deeper document.
(9) Show Info Hints: This button shows or hides the tool tip information when placing the mouse
over an element in the user interface. See section ↑2.2.2, Info Hints for more information.
(10) Audio input level meter: The audio input level meter lets you monitor and adjust the input
level for signals arriving at REAKTOR’s inputs. The audio input meter is only visible if the load-
ed Ensemble includes audio inputs. See section ↑2.2.3, Audio Input & Output Level Meters for
more information.
Getting to Know REAKTOR
The Toolbar
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 15


--- Page 16 ---

(11) MIDI/OSC input and output: The MIDI/OSC input and output indicators light up when REAK-
TOR sends or receives any MIDI and OSC messages. MIDI and OSC are the main ways of con-
trolling REAKTOR with hardware. The indicators are useful for checking if your hardware is
communicating with REAKTOR. See section ↑9, Controlling REAKTOR for more information
about MIDI and OSC.
(12) Audio output level meter: The audio output level meter lets you monitor and adjust the out-
put level for signals sent from REAKTOR’s outputs. See section ↑2.2.3, Audio Input & Output
Level Meters for more information.
(13) System info: The system info area contains displays and controls for the system and audio
status. See section ↑2.2.4, System Info for more information.
(14) NI icon: Clicking on the NI icon opens a window displaying information about the software.
This window can be used to find the version number of your current REAKTOR installation,
which is located to the top left of the window.
2.2.1
Transport
 
The Transport controls in REAKTOR
Since REAKTOR can be used to create sequencers, REAKTOR has its own transport for con-
trolling playback.
The transport controls are not available in the plug-in version of REAKTOR since it uses
the host’s transport settings.
Getting to Know REAKTOR
The Toolbar
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 16


--- Page 17 ---

•
The leftmost button resets the play position (meaning it rewinds the play head to position
zero). You can also reset the play position by pressing [ctrl] + [space] (Windows) or [cmd]
+ [space] (OS X) on your computer keyboard.
•
The center button is the play button. It is used to start or pause playback. You can also
start or pause playback by pressing [space] on your computer keyboard.
•
The value display to the right is where you can define the playback tempo in BPM (beats
per minute). You can do this either by clicking and dragging the value up and down, or by
double-clicking and typing in a new tempo.
2.2.2
Info Hints
 
Many of the elements in REAKTOR’s user interface show tool tip information when you place
the mouse over them. This information is called an Info Hint in REAKTOR. The Info Hints can
be enabled from the toolbar.
1.
Click on the Show Info Hints button in the toolbar to enable the Info Hints. Alternatively,
press the keyboard shortcut [ctrl] + [i] (Windows) or [cmd] + [i] (OS X).
Getting to Know REAKTOR
The Toolbar
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 17


--- Page 18 ---

⇨The Info Hints are now shown as soon as you place the mouse over an element in REAK-
TOR’S user interface.
2.2.3
Audio Input & Output Level Meters
 
The audio input and output level meters in REAKTOR
The audio input and output level meters let you monitor and adjust the level of audio signals
arriving at REAKTOR’s audio inputs as well as audio signals sent from REAKTOR’s audio out-
puts.
The audio input level meter is only visible if the loaded Ensemble includes audio inputs.
If the signal level is too high and the input or output is overloading, red lights will appear at
the right edge of the meters.
Getting to Know REAKTOR
The Toolbar
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 18


--- Page 19 ---

Below each of the meters is an arrow. Clicking and dragging on the arrow sets the input or out-
put signal level. For example, if the output of an instrument is too loud, you can lower the sig-
nal level by moving the arrow below the output meter to the left.
2.2.4
System Info
 
The system info in REAKTOR
The rightmost area in the toolbar contains the system info and controls.
•
The top left desplay shows a measure of the CPU load in percent.
•
The bottom left display shows the currently set sample rate. Clicking on it opens a drop-
down menu for selecting the sample rate (see section ↑2.2.4.1, Changing the Sample
Rate).
•
The power button to the right stops and starts REAKTOR's audio engine. If the audio com-
ing from an Ensemble cuts out unexpectedly, sometimes switching the power button off
and on can fix the problem.
2.2.4.1
Changing the Sample Rate
 
By default REAKTOR uses the sample rate of your audio interface for processing. This is also
the default setting for most Ensembles. However, some Ensembles (e.g. MONARK, ROUNDS)
use a higher sample rate to improve audio quality.
1.
Clicking on the sample rate display opens the sample rate drop-down menu.
Getting to Know REAKTOR
The Toolbar
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 19


--- Page 20 ---

The sample rate setting in the toolbar
The sample rate menu contains a number of entries, organized in three categories:
•
Host/System: This entry sets REAKTOR to operate at the same sample rate as your audio
interface. This is the default setting for most Ensembles.
•
Fixed:: The fixed entries are multiples of your audio interface’s sample rate. They can be
saved with the Ensemble and are used to improve the audio quality. Keep in mind that
higher sampling rates require more CPU.
•
Factor:: These entries allow you to reduce or increase the sample rate in the current RE-
AKTOR session.
2.3
Play Mode vs Edit Mode
 
REAKTOR has two modes of operation:
•
Play Mode: This mode optimizes REAKTOR for loading and playing Ensembles and Racks.
It decreases loading times and streamlines the interface, but removes the options for
deep editing of Ensembles and Instruments. This mode is especially useful when using
REAKTOR in a DAW or host.
Getting to Know REAKTOR
Play Mode vs Edit Mode
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 20


--- Page 21 ---

•
Edit Mode: This mode gives you access to all of the controls and options REAKTOR has to
offer, allowing you to create or edit Ensembles and Instruments.
1.
To toggle Edit Mode on or off, click on the EDIT button in REAKTOR's toolbar.
2.4
File Types and Hierarchy
 
REAKTOR uses several distinct file types, each representing a different structural level in the
application. These levels help to organize your REAKTOR projects in a meaningful way, and
the corresponding files can be used to share aspects of your work between projects or with oth-
er users.
Ensembles
At the top level is the Ensemble, which holds all relevant information of a REAKTOR session. It
represents the basic project file you are working with in REAKTOR. An Ensemble can contain a
single instrument or a full suite of sequencers, synthesizers, and effects. Pre-built instruments
and effects also come as Ensembles, ready to be used in your music or sound design projects.
Ensembles are saved as *.ens files.
Getting to Know REAKTOR
File Types and Hierarchy
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 21


--- Page 22 ---

A REAKTOR Ensemble containing one Instrument
Racks
Racks facilitate analog-style modular synthesizer patching using pre-built modules in the
Blocks format. In a Rack, you can arrange, connect, and control Blocks directly in the Panel.
The patch is also mirrored in the Structure, allowing you to choose your preferred patching
workflow. All settings including the arrangement of Blocks and the connections made between
them are saved and recalled with your host sequencer project (host chunk saving). Racks are
saved as *.nksr files.
Getting to Know REAKTOR
File Types and Hierarchy
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 22


--- Page 23 ---

A REAKTOR Rack containing Blocks
Information about Racks can be found in the Getting Started and REAKTOR Blocks
Manual documents.
Instruments
An Instrument is a container for a synthesizer, sequencer, an effect, or any other musical tool
you create, representing the so-called Primary level of REAKTOR. It includes the internal
Structure, MIDI processing, Panel (user interface), and Snapshots (presets) associated with
your musical tool. In order to connect an Instrument with REAKTOR’s audio inputs and out-
Getting to Know REAKTOR
File Types and Hierarchy
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 23


--- Page 24 ---

puts, it has to be loaded in an Ensemble. You can combine multiple Instruments in one En-
semble. In REAKTOR Blocks, each module is a separate Instrument, allowing you to patch be-
tween multiple modules within an Ensemble or a Rack. Instruments are saved as *.ism files.
A REAKTOR Instrument containing several Macros.
Information about Instruments can be found in the Getting Started and Diving Deeper
documents.
Modules and Macros
Instruments are created using Modules. These are REAKTOR’s basic building blocks. Modules
can be organized into containers called Macros. This is especially useful if your Instrument
consists of a complex structure with a large number of Modules. Macros can be saved as *.mdl
files.
Getting to Know REAKTOR
File Types and Hierarchy
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 24


--- Page 25 ---

A REAKTOR Macro containing several Modules and another Macro.
Information about Modules and Macros can be found in the Building in Primary docu-
ment.
Core Cells
Core Cells are a way of creating your own DSP modules using REAKTOR’s visual programming
language. Core is the most advanced level of programming in REAKTOR. Core Cells can be
saved as *.rcc files.
A REAKTOR Core Cell.
Information about Core Cells can be found in the Building in Core document.
Getting to Know REAKTOR
File Types and Hierarchy
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 25


--- Page 26 ---

2.5
Third-Party and Protected Content
 
Third-party developers are welcome to develop official content products for REAKTOR. These
products are activated using Native Access.
Find information about installing and activating third-party content products for REAK-
TOR using Native Access in the following article on our website: https://support.native-
instruments.com/hc/articles/115004430405
After installing and activating your third-party content product, you will find it in the Player tab
of the Browser, sorted by vendor:
The Player tab containing content by Native Instruments and third-party developer Tim Exile
Blocks Content for Use in Racks
Blocks need to be officially licensed for use in REAKTOR Racks. After obtaining the license for
an official Blocks content product you can install it via Native Access. After the installation,
the included Racks and Blocks are shown in the Browser’s Player tab, as well as the Library
tab and the search box when a Rack is loaded.
Getting to Know REAKTOR
Third-Party and Protected Content
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 26


--- Page 27 ---

Content Protection
Any official REAKTOR content product from third-party developers and Native Instruments can
be protected. This means that the Structure of the Ensemble – or Instrument in the case of a
protected module for REAKTOR Blocks – cannot be accessed by the user. As a user, you will
notice the following restrictions:
•
If you load a protected Ensemble into REAKTOR’s Full mode, you will not be able to ena-
ble Edit Mode. The EDIT button will be greyed out, as if you were loading an Ensemble
into REAKTOR’s Player mode.
•
If you add a protected Instrument (module for REAKTOR Blocks) to an Ensemble, you will
not be able to access the Structure of the added Instrument.
•
If you import a protected Ensemble into another Ensemble, you can still enable Edit
Mode, however you will not be able to access the Structure of the imported Ensemble.
If you add a protected Instrument or import a protected Ensemble, the Properties for the
Instrument or Ensemble are still available. For example, this allows you to setup MIDI
and OSC control.
Samples that are embedded into a content product can also be protected. In this case, you will
notice the following restrictions:
•
Embedded samples are marked as [Copy Protected Content] in the Sample Map Editor,
showing a lock icon in the Embed column of the Sample List.
•
Certain functions are disabled in the context menu and the corresponding buttons are
greyed out.
If you are a developer and want to contact Native Instruments about your content prod-
ucts, please use the email address provided on the following website: https://www.na-
tive-instruments.com/en/specials/komplete/developer/
Getting to Know REAKTOR
Third-Party and Protected Content
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 27

