--- Page 61 ---

7
Using Racks
 
Racks facilitate analog-style modular synthesizer patching using pre-built modules in the
Blocks format. In a Rack, you can arrange, connect, and control Blocks directly in the Panel.
The patch is also mirrored in the Structure, allowing you to choose your preferred patching
workflow.
This chapter provides an overview of the Racks and explains how to manage them. If you want
to learn more about Racks and all the available Blocks, refer to the following resources:
•
Learn how to patch using REAKTOR Blocks in a Rack by following the Quick Start Guide
online: www.native-instruments.com/reaktor-blocks-quickstart
•
Learn all about the Blocks and their controls in the application by using REAKTOR’s Info
Hints. For more information, refer to ↑7.1, Overview.
7.1
Overview
 
The following overview shows you how a Rack is displayed in REAKTOR and where you can
find the most important controls.
Using Racks
Overview
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 61


--- Page 62 ---

7
8
5
6
3
1
2
4
Overview of a Rack in REAKTOR
(1) Library: This tab in the Browser shows all installed Blocks. They are organized in folders.
The contents of the selected folder are shown in the lower section of the Browser. You can drag
and drop the Blocks from the lower section into the Rack to build your patch.
(2) View modes: These three buttons control the visibility of ports and wires in the Rack.
•
Compact View: All ports and wires are hidden. You can focus on tweaking the controls of
the Blocks.
•
Ports View: Only the wires are hidden. You have a clear view of all controls while the ports
are still visible, indicating connections in the patch by color coding.
•
Ports and Wires View: The full patch including ports and wires is visible and can be
changed by making new connections or removing existing ones.
Using Racks
Overview
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 62


--- Page 63 ---

(3) Show Structure: This button shows or hides the additional Structure view (8). This is useful
for creating and managing large patches. The Structure shows all connections even when Com-
pact View or Ports View are selected.
(4) Rack switching: The arrow buttons in the Rack menu switch between Racks in the selected
category folder of the factory content. For more information, refer to ↑7.2, Loading Racks.
(5) Panel view: Shows all Blocks in the Rack. You can change the controls on each Block to
adjust its parameters. Inputs are located on the left side of a Block, while outputs are located
on the right side. You can connect Blocks by clicking on an output and dragging a wire to an
input. You can remove a wire by double-clicking on the connected input.
(6) Info Hints: Enables or disables tooltips for all Blocks and their controls. When enabled, you
can hover over the header of a Block to view general information. Hovering over a control shows
detail information.
(7) Search box: Press the Enter key on your computer keyboard to call up the search box. You
can find Blocks by entering their function, family, or name. The search box can be used both
in Panel and Structure views.
(8) Structure view: Shows all Blocks in the Rack. Inputs are located on the left side of a Block,
while outputs are located on the right side. You can connect Blocks by clicking on an output
and dragging a wire to an input. You can click on a wire to select it and press Delete or Back-
space on your computer keyboard to delete a wire.
7.2
Loading Racks
 
Each Blocks product includes premade Racks as factory content. You can load these Racks
from the Player tab in the Browser. Alternatively, you can open Racks saved on your hard drive.
Loading Racks from a Blocks Product
To load a Rack included in a Blocks product:
Using Racks
Loading Racks
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 63


--- Page 64 ---

1.
Open the folder of the Blocks product in the Browser’s Player tab, select a category folder
and load a Rack by double-clicking on it in the lower section.
Once you have selected a category folder, you can also switch between Racks using the Rack
menu in the toolbar.
1.
Click on the arrows in the Rack menu to switch between Racks in the selected category
folder.
Using Racks
Loading Racks
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 64


--- Page 65 ---

Opening a Rack saved on the Hard Drive
To open a Rack saved on the hard drive:
1.
Click on the drop-down menu next to the REAKTOR logo, go to the File menu and select
Open.
2.
In the file dialog, browse to the Rack file you saved, select it, and click Open.
⇨The Rack opens in REAKTOR and you can start using it.
7.3
Saving Racks
 
When you have created a sound you like, you can save your Rack in a file. This way you can
recall it later and share it with others.
1.
Click on the drop-down menu next to the REAKTOR logo, go to the File menu and select
Save.
2.
In the file dialog, browse to a location of your choice, type in a name for your Rack, and
click Save.
Using Racks
Saving Racks
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 65


--- Page 66 ---

When using REAKTOR as a plug-in, all settings including the arrangement of Blocks and
the connections made between them are also saved and recalled with your host se-
quencer project (host chunk saving).
7.4
Creating a New Rack
 
When you want to create a Rack from scratch, you need to open a new Rack.
1.
Click on the drop-down menu next to the REAKTOR logo, go to the File menu and select
New Rack.
7.5
Additional Settings
 
Additional settings for Racks are available in REAKTOR’s side pane.
•
Panel Sets allow you to save different configurations of the Panel view in the same Rack
file. You can show or hide Blocks (while they remain active) or switch between arrange-
ments of Blocks for specific use cases. For more information, refer to the REAKTOR 6
Diving Deeper document, chapter Panelsets.
•
You can assign any of the controls in the Rack to your MIDI controller. For more informa-
tion, refer to ↑9, Controlling REAKTOR.
•
You can also use OSC to control your Rack, or route MIDI and OSC data from and to indi-
vidual Blocks in the Rack. For more information, refer to the REAKTOR 6 Diving Deeper
document, chapter Controlling REAKTOR with MIDI and OSC.
Using Racks
Creating a New Rack
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 66

