--- Page 6 ---

1
Welcome to REAKTOR
 
REAKTOR is a visual programming environment based on modules and wires, allowing you to
create any musical tool imaginable. Its many uses include music creation, digital art, instru-
ment and effects building, as well as scientific applications. REAKTOR 6 builds on a long his-
tory of legendary software including NI’s first product, GENERATOR.
Welcome to REAKTOR 6
Known for its unrivalled sound quality, REAKTOR is the complete toolkit for creating instru-
ments and effects with high-quality DSP components. The included content allows you to look
behind the curtain and explore the state-of-the-art technology at the core of many of our prod-
ucts. REAKTOR Racks facilitate analog-style modular patching with Blocks—the perfect intro-
duction to using modules and wires to create your own instruments.
Welcome to REAKTOR
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 6


--- Page 7 ---

From playing and combining pre-built instruments and effects to building your own tools with
its extensive Library or creating custom DSP algorithms, REAKTOR suits musicians, builders,
and programmers alike. Based on a hierarchical structure with a coherent interface, REAKTOR
is optimized to facilitate all of these use cases. This means that you can approach REAKTOR
level by level, making yourself familiar with its deep functionality one step at a time.
The REAKTOR 6 documentation adapts this approach, guiding you through the different levels
of functionality in a clear and comprehensible manner. The Getting Started and Diving Deeper
documents cover all basic functions and settings in REAKTOR, while the tutorials and instruc-
tions provided in Building in Primary and Building in Core make creating your own musical tools
more accessible than ever before.
REAKTOR is fortunate to be supported by a large community of experienced users who actively
share their Ensembles in the REAKTOR User Library on our website. There are thousands of
REAKTOR Ensembles available, ready to be played, combined and modified—a great source of
inspiration, both musically and technologically. We invite you to join this vibrant community
and are looking forward to seeing and hearing your new creations!
1.1
System Requirements
 
Your computer system needs to meet certain requirements in order to run REAKTOR.
For the latest REAKTOR system requirements and compatibility information visit:
www.native-instruments.com/reaktor6specifications
1.2
REAKTOR Modes: Full, Player and Demo
 
What you can do with the REAKTOR version installed on your computer depends on which
mode REAKTOR is running in. This mode depends on the license you are using:
•
Full mode: If you have already installed and activated REAKTOR, as a single product or as
part of a bundle like KOMPLETE, you are using it in Full mode. In Full mode, all func-
tionality is available without restrictions.
Welcome to REAKTOR
System Requirements
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 7


--- Page 8 ---

•
Player mode: You have installed and activated any of the KOMPLETE instruments and ef-
fects for REAKTOR and the free REAKTOR Player. In Player mode you can play Instru-
ments and change their settings, but cannot edit their internal structure. Play mode also
allows you to patch and play with Blocks in Racks. All Instrument settings are saved with
your host project when using REAKTOR as a plug-in.
•
Demo mode: You installed REAKTOR and a number of KOMPLETE Instruments as demo
versions, but did not activate any of the products yet. In this case you are using the demo
license for REAKTOR, and REAKTOR is running in Demo mode. In Demo mode, you have
all functionality but the application will stop generating sound after 30 minutes. Further-
more, storing is disabled.
1.3
The REAKTOR 6 Documentation
 
The REAKTOR documentation is accessible from the Help menu
The documentation for REAKTOR 6 is divided into five separate documents, guiding you from
loading and playing pre-built Ensembles to building your own Instruments.
•
REAKTOR 6 What Is New is written for users who are already familiar with previous versions
of REAKTOR and only describes the latest features in brief.
Welcome to REAKTOR
The REAKTOR 6 Documentation
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 8


--- Page 9 ---

•
REAKTOR 6 Getting Started is for new users. It is the only document needed for users who
intend to use REAKTOR for loading and playing pre-built REAKTOR instruments and ef-
fects.
•
REAKTOR Blocks Quick Start Guide is an online resource showing you how to use REAKTOR
Blocks in the Rack format. Find it here: www.native-instruments.com/reaktor-blocks-
quickstart
•
REAKTOR 6 Diving Deeper expands on the concepts introduced in the Getting Started docu-
ment. It provides more detail on subjects like Snapshots (REAKTOR's preset system), and
introduces advanced topics like OSC control and combining multiple Instruments in one
Ensemble.
•
REAKTOR 6 Building in Primary shows you how to build your own Instruments in REAK-
TOR’s Primary level. It focuses on a series of tutorials that guide you through building
your first synthesizers, effects, and sequencers.
•
REAKTOR 6 Building in Core describes the Core level of REAKTOR with its low-level build-
ing features, which can be used for implementing custom DSP algorithms. It includes ref-
erence information about the Core Macro Library, an comprehensive collection of DSP
building blocks.
With the exception of the What Is New document, each of the documents listed above builds
on the knowledge of the previous documents. While it is not necessary to read all of every
document, some of the more advanced documents, like Building in Primary, assume knowl-
edge from the previous documents.
In-depth information about using REAKTOR Blocks in Ensembles can be found in the
REAKTOR Blocks Manual. To learn about opening manuals for REAKTOR content, refer
to ↑1.4, REAKTOR Content Documentation.
1.4
REAKTOR Content Documentation
 
REAKTOR comes with a comprehensive Factory Library, including many pre-built instruments
and effects, as well as Blocks, a new modular synthesizer framework that brings the experience
of patching an analog modular synthesizer to REAKTOR. The manuals for this content, as well
as any REAKTOR-based KOMPLETE instruments or effects you have installed, can be ac-
cessed from the Browser in REAKTOR’s Side Pane.
Welcome to REAKTOR
REAKTOR Content Documentation
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 9


--- Page 10 ---

To open the manuals for REAKTOR content:
1.
Click on the Browser icon in the Side Pane to open the Browser.
2.
Select the Player tab.
Welcome to REAKTOR
REAKTOR Content Documentation
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 10


--- Page 11 ---

3.
Double-click on the folder of the content you wish to view the manual for.
4.
Select the Documentation subfolder. The manual shows up as a PDF file in the lower sec-
tion of the Browser.
5.
Double-click on the PDF file.
⇨The manual will open in your standard PDF reader.
Welcome to REAKTOR
REAKTOR Content Documentation
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 11


--- Page 12 ---

1.5
Manual Conventions
 
This section introduces you to the signage and text highlighting used in this manual.
•
Text appearing in (drop-down) menus (such as Open…, Save as… etc.) and paths to loca-
tions on your hard disk or other storage devices is printed in italics.
•
Text appearing elsewhere (labels of buttons, controls, text next to checkboxes etc.) is
printed in blue. Whenever you see this formatting applied, you will find the same text ap-
pearing somewhere on the screen.
•
Important names and concepts are printed in bold.
•
References to keys on your computer’s keyboard you’ll find put in square brackets (e.g.,
“Press [Shift] + [Enter]”).
1.
Single instructions are introduced by this play button type arrow.
⇨Results of actions are introduced by this smaller arrow.
An indented, gray paragraph contains additional, contextual information.
Furthermore, this manual uses particular formatting to point out special facts and to warn you
of potential issues. The icons introducing these notes let you see what kind of information is to
be expected:
The speech bubble icon indicates a useful tip that may often help you to solve a task
more efficiently.
The exclamation mark icon highlights important information that is essential for the giv-
en context.
The red cross icon warns you of serious issues and potential risks that require your full
attention.
Welcome to REAKTOR
Manual Conventions
 
REAKTOR 6 - Getting Started - 12

