--- Page 7 ---

1
Welcome to Diving Deeper
 
Welcome to Diving Deeper into REAKTOR. This document picks up where the Getting Started
left off, covering some of the more advanced techniques and options available when using RE-
AKTOR. As such, it assumes you are familiar with the main areas of the user interface, the
general audio and midi settings, and how to load and play Ensembles, including Snapshot han-
dling and basic MIDI control. If this sounds unfamiliar to you, we recommend that you read
the Getting Started document first.
This document is designed to show you how to get the most out of your REAKTOR instruments
and effects. It covers subjects that you have already been introduced to, like Snapshots and
MIDI connections, in more detail. It also introduces more complex concepts like controlling
REAKTOR with OSC.
The last section in this document introduces you to the Structure View as a precursor to the
REAKTOR 6 Building in Primary document.
Welcome to Diving Deeper
 
REAKTOR 6 - Diving Deeper - 7


--- Page 8 ---

1.1
The REAKTOR 6 Documentation
 
The REAKTOR documentation is accessible from the Help menu
The documentation for REAKTOR 6 is divided into five separate documents, guiding you from
loading and playing pre-built Ensembles to building your own Instruments.
•
REAKTOR 6 What Is New is written for users who are already familiar with previous versions
of REAKTOR and only describes the latest features in brief.
•
REAKTOR 6 Getting Started is for new users. It is the only document needed for users who
intend to use REAKTOR for loading and playing pre-built REAKTOR instruments and ef-
fects.
•
REAKTOR 6 Diving Deeper expands on the concepts introduced in the Getting Started docu-
ment. It provides more detail on subjects like Snapshots (REAKTOR's preset system), and
introduces advanced topics like OSC control and combining multiple Instruments in one
Ensemble.
Welcome to Diving Deeper
The REAKTOR 6 Documentation
 
REAKTOR 6 - Diving Deeper - 8


--- Page 9 ---

•
REAKTOR 6 Building in Primary shows you how to build your own Instruments in REAK-
TOR’s Primary level. It focuses on a series of tutorials that guide you through building
your first synthesizers, effects, and sequencers.
•
REAKTOR 6 Building in Core describes the Core level of REAKTOR with its low-level build-
ing features, which can be used for implementing custom DSP algorithms. It includes ref-
erence information about the Core Macro Library, an comprehensive collection of DSP
building blocks.
With the exception of the What Is New document, each of the documents listed above builds
on the knowledge of the previous documents. While it is not necessary to read all of every
document, some of the more advanced documents, like Building in Primary, assume knowl-
edge from the previous documents.
REAKTOR Content Documentation
REAKTOR comes with a comprehensive Factory Library, including many pre-built instruments
and effects, as well as Blocks, a new modular synthesizer framework that brings the experience
of patching an analog modular synthesizer to REAKTOR. The manuals for this content, as well
as any REAKTOR-based KOMPLETE instruments or effects you have installed, can be ac-
cessed from the Browser in REAKTOR’s Side Pane.
To open the manuals for REAKTOR content:
1.
Click on the Browser icon in the Side Pane to open the Browser.
Welcome to Diving Deeper
The REAKTOR 6 Documentation
 
REAKTOR 6 - Diving Deeper - 9


--- Page 10 ---

2.
Select the Player tab.
3.
Double-click on the folder of the content you wish to view the manual for.
Welcome to Diving Deeper
The REAKTOR 6 Documentation
 
REAKTOR 6 - Diving Deeper - 10


--- Page 11 ---

4.
Select the Documentation subfolder. The manual shows up as a PDF file in the lower sec-
tion of the Browser.
5.
Double-click on the PDF file.
→
The manual will open in your standard PDF reader.
 
Welcome to Diving Deeper
The REAKTOR 6 Documentation
 
REAKTOR 6 - Diving Deeper - 11


--- Page 12 ---

1.2
Manual Conventions
 
This section introduces you to the signage and text highlighting used in this manual.
•
Text appearing in (drop-down) menus (such as Open…, Save as… etc.) and paths to loca-
tions on your hard disk or other storage devices is printed in italics.
•
Text appearing elsewhere (labels of buttons, controls, text next to checkboxes etc.) is
printed in blue. Whenever you see this formatting applied, you will find the same text ap-
pearing somewhere on the screen.
•
Important names and concepts are printed in bold.
•
References to keys on your computer’s keyboard you’ll find put in square brackets (e.g.,
“Press [Shift] + [Enter]”).
►
Single instructions are introduced by this play button type arrow.
→
Results of actions are introduced by this smaller arrow.
An indented, gray paragraph contains additional, contextual information.
Furthermore, this manual uses particular formatting to point out special facts and to warn you
of potential issues. The icons introducing these notes let you see what kind of information is to
be expected:
The speech bubble icon indicates a useful tip that may often help you to solve a task
more efficiently.
The exclamation mark icon highlights important information that is essential for the giv-
en context.
The red cross icon warns you of serious issues and potential risks that require your full
attention.
Welcome to Diving Deeper
Manual Conventions
 
REAKTOR 6 - Diving Deeper - 12

