--- Page 35 ---

4
Automation
 
Like other plug-ins, controls in REAKTOR Ensembles can be automated by a host sequencer.
Instruments and effects from Native Instruments (like MONARK or THE FINGER) already have
their automation settings set up to function correctly.
However, some Ensembles downloaded from other sources (including the REAKTOR User Li-
brary) might not be correctly set up, in which case you will need to fix the Automation IDs of
the Ensemble.
If you are combining multiple Instruments in an Ensemble, you will also need to manage the
automation settings.
Automation IDs
Every control in REAKTOR is given an Automation ID, which it compiles into a list to send to
the host sequencer, telling it how many automatable parameters the REAKTOR plug-in con-
tains.
Automation IDs are automatically generated, but are not always automatically updated.
•
Removing controls will not update the automation list. If you add two controls to your En-
semble, and then delete the first one you added, a hole will be left in the automation list.
•
Removing Instruments will update the Ensemble automation list. If you create an Ensem-
ble with two Instruments, and delete the first one you added, the Automation IDs of the
second Instrument will be moved up to fill the gap. Note that this behavior will not fill any
gaps in the automation list of the Instrument.
In some cases, this should not be a problem, especially if you are using REAKTOR in stand-
alone. However there are cases in which you will need to manage the Automation IDs, and this
can be done from the Automation Properties.
4.1
Automation Properties
 
The settings related to automation can be found in the Properties for an Ensemble or Instru-
ment, under the Connect tab in a section labelled AUTOMATION.
Automation
Automation Properties
 
REAKTOR 6 - Diving Deeper - 35


--- Page 36 ---

The Automation Properties
The following settings are available:
•
Show Name: This checkbox selects whether or not the Instrument name will be included
in the Automation Name of the control. Note that this option is not present in the Ensem-
ble Automation Properties.
Automation
Automation Properties
 
REAKTOR 6 - Diving Deeper - 36


--- Page 37 ---

•
Base ID: Displays the lowest Automation ID in use by the Instrument/Ensemble. This dis-
play can be used to show where an Instrument is positioned in the Ensemble's main Auto-
mation ID list.
•
Max ID: This option selects the number of Automation IDs needed by the Instrument/En-
semble. Most of the time, this can be set to the same value as the Max ID in use display.
•
Max ID in use: Displays the highest Automation ID of all the Modules inside the Instru-
ment/Ensemble that can be automated.
•
ID Actions: From this menu you can select several functions to perform on the Automation
IDs in the Instrument/Ensemble:
◦Instrument Up: Moves the Instrument higher in the Ensemble's main Automation ID
list, reducing its Base ID value.
◦Instrument Down: Moves the Instrument lower in the Ensemble's main Automation ID
list, increasing its Base ID value.
◦Compress IDs: Select this option to compress the Automation ID list, effectively re-
moving any gaps in the Automation ID list by changing the Automation IDs of the con-
trols.
◦Sort and Compress IDs: Similar to the function above, but the controls are sorted in
alphabetical order and given new Automation IDs accordingly.
4.2
Common Issues
 
If you are using REAKTOR Ensembles in a host sequencer and find that automation is not
working as expected, there are often common causes that can be fixed quite easily.
The Max ID Setting Is Not High Enough.
If you are trying to automate a control and nothing is happening, try the following for each In-
strument in the Ensemble and for the Ensemble itself:
1.
Use the Compress IDs function to remove any gaps in the Automation ID list.
2.
Increase the Max ID setting so that it is equal to the Max ID in use value.
Automation
Common Issues
 
REAKTOR 6 - Diving Deeper - 37


--- Page 38 ---

If you find that automation for the control still does not work, then it is possible that
automation has been blocked for that control by the builder of the Ensemble, which
usually means that automating this control might cause problems.
The List of Automatable Controls in the Host Sequencer is Difficult to Read.
If you are trying to locate a control in the Automation ID list of your host sequencer, but find
the Automation ID list difficult to read, try to following:
1.
Use the Sort and Compress IDs function to arrange the Automation IDs in alphabetical or-
der, and to remove any gaps in the Automation ID list.
2.
Uncheck the Show Name option to remove excess text from the Automation Names.
Automation
Common Issues
 
REAKTOR 6 - Diving Deeper - 38

