--- Page 52 ---

6
The Player and Recorder
 
The Player and Recorder utilities allow you to play back and record audio files.
►
Click on the tape icon in the Toolbar to open the Player and Recorder.
→
The Player and Recorder bar will open below the Toolbar, with the Player on the left and
the Recorder on the right.
6.1
The Player
 
The File Player
The File Player enables you to route the Audio signal from an audio file (*.wav, *.aif, or *.aiff)
into your REAKTOR Structure. The output of the File Player is sent directly to the first two Au-
dio Inputs of the top-level Ensemble. This is particularly useful for testing when building an
effect.
When the File Player is playing, all other signals that would otherwise arrive at the first two
Audio Inputs are overridden in favor of the File Player's output signal.
If the Ensemble contains no audio inputs, then no sound will be heard when you use the
File Player.
There are three ways to load an audio file into the Player:
•
The first way is to double-click on any audio file in the Files tab of the Browser in the
Side Pane. This action opens the Player/Recorder Bar (if not already open), loads the file
into the Player and automatically starts the file playback.
The Player and Recorder
The Player
 
REAKTOR 6 - Diving Deeper - 52


--- Page 53 ---

•
Alternatively, you can drag and drop audio files into the text field of the File Player (when
first opened, this will say Select File). In addition to dragging and dropping from the
Browser, you can fetch files from other places like from the Desktop of your operating sys-
tem. Again, after you have performed this action the File Player automatically starts the
file playback.
•
The third way is to press the AUTO button of the File Player. This activates the Player's
Auto Mode. A single click on any file audio file in the Browser results in the file being
loaded and played back in the File Player.
The Player has three playback controls. They are (from left to right):
•
Reset play position to zero. This control is only visible after a file has been played.
•
Play/pause audio playback.
•
Loop mode on/off.
►
If you have a file loaded in the Player, you can use the anchor icon to drag and drop this
file to another location. For example, you could drag the file into REAKTOR's Sample
Map Editor.
►
Click on the magnifying glass icon to the far right of the Player to open the Files tab of
the Browser in the Side Pane.
The Magnifying glass icon is only visible if the Files Browser is not visible.
6.2
The Recorder
 
The File Recorder
The File Recorder enables you to record an Ensemble's audio output from its first two Audio
Outputs. The recorded audio signal is written to an audio file on your disk.
The Player and Recorder
The Recorder
 
REAKTOR 6 - Diving Deeper - 53


--- Page 54 ---

Windows systems record *.wav files and OS X systems record *.aif files.
6.2.1
Recording Audio
 
To record a new audio file with the File Recorder:
1.
Click on the Folder icon in the File Recorder.
2.
Select a location, name, and format (wav or aiff) for the audio file in the dialog window.
3.
Click Save to create the audio file.
4.
Click on the Record Arm circle to activate record mode.
5.
When you are ready to record, click on the Play button.
6.
Click on the Stop button to stop recording.
→
The recorded audio will be saved in the audio file you created in steps 2 and 3.
If you do not specify a file name and location as directed in steps 1 to 3 above, then the
audio file you record into will be located in the Audio Files sub-folder of the User Library
location.
The recorded audio file will be a 16bit uncompressed wav or aiff file. The sample rate of the
audio file will be the same as the sample rate REAKTOR was running at when the recording
took place.
It is also possible to trigger the recording process via other means. These options are located in
the Recorder Settings, which are described in the following section.
The Player and Recorder
The Recorder
 
REAKTOR 6 - Diving Deeper - 54


--- Page 55 ---

6.2.2
Recorder Settings
 
►
You can access the Recorder's settings by pressing the Recorder Settings button (the cog/
gear icon).
→
The Recorder Settings dialog window will be displayed.
The Recorder Settings
The Recorder Settings has 5 options available:
•
Record Start By: This menu allows you to select a recording method (when the Recorder
is armed). The options available are:
◦Manual: Recording can only be started by pressing the Recorder Start button.
◦Clock Start: Recording starts when the REAKTOR Clock is started with the Start Clock
button in the Main Toolbar.
◦Note On: You can also start recording by a MIDI Note On event, i.e. when a key is
pressed on your MIDI or computer keyboard.
•
Start Offset: In this edit field you can specify a time delay in bars before the recording
starts after a “record” event (specified in the Record Start By menu) has arrived.
•
Record Stop By: This menu allows you to choose under which conditions the recording
process is stopped:
The Player and Recorder
The Recorder
 
REAKTOR 6 - Diving Deeper - 55


--- Page 56 ---

◦Manual Only: You can only stop the recording process using the Recorder Stop button.
◦Clock Stop: Recording stops when the REAKTOR Clock is stopped with the Stop Clock
button in the Main Toolbar.
◦Note Off: You can also stop recording by a MIDI Note Off event, i.e. when a key is
released on your MIDI or computer keyboard.
◦Loop Length: The File Recorder stops recording when the loop length duration, as
specified by the Loop Length edit field in bars, has been reached.
•
Loop Length: This edit field lets you specify the duration of the recording in bars. This
value is only used when the Loop Length option in the Record Stop By menu has been
selected.
•
Slave Player Controls to Recorder: With this checkbox you can cause the Player transport
controls to follow those of the Recorder. This can be useful when you want to use the
Player to send an audio file through a REAKTOR effect Instrument and simultaneously re-
cord the result at the output using the Recorder.
The Player and Recorder
The Recorder
 
REAKTOR 6 - Diving Deeper - 56

