--- Page 13 ---

2
Play Mode vs. Edit Mode
 
REAKTOR has two modes of operation:
•
Play Mode: Optimizes REAKTOR for using instruments and effects. Editing features are
limited in favor of a more streamlined interface and faster loading times.
•
Edit Mode: Displays all the controls available for building and editing Ensembles.
When you first launch REAKTOR in stand-alone, and every time you load it as a plug-in, it will
start in Play Mode.
2.1
Play Mode
 
The main benefits of Play Mode are:
•
Streamlined interface to maximize the Ensemble Panel space: In Play mode, all of the Struc-
ture navigation controls are hidden, presenting a more streamlined workspace for those
who want to use instruments and effects built in REAKTOR, but do not intend to edit the
Ensemble Structures.
•
Optimized loading times for Ensembles: Play Mode is required to be active in order for RE-
AKTOR to use the Compiled Core Cell Code Cache, and so can decrease loading times of
larger Ensembles significantly. For more information on the Compiled Core Cell Code
Cache please read REAKTOR 6 Building in Primary document.
•
Increased ease of use as a plug-in: Play Mode also makes working with REAKTOR as a
plug-in easier by disabling any control options that are not saved in a host chunk — that
is to say, any options that require you to save the Ensemble file when you are using RE-
AKTOR as a plug-in. This means you no longer need to worry about the auto-save func-
tions and host recall for your projects.
•
Double-click knobs to set them to their default value: In Edit Mode, double-clicking anything
on the Ensemble Panel generally opens the Properties for that Module. Since editing a
Module's Properties is not possible in Play Mode, double-clicking is redefined to reset
knobs and faders to their default value. This makes it easy, for example, to reset an EQ to
a clean setting.
Play Mode vs. Edit Mode
Play Mode
 
REAKTOR 6 - Diving Deeper - 13


--- Page 14 ---

2.2
Edit Mode
 
►
To activate Edit Mode, click on the EDIT button in the Toolbar.
Edit Mode makes it possible to alter the Structure of an Ensemble, and edit any other settings
that are saved in the Ensemble file.
For example, recalling Panelsets is possible in both Edit Mode and Play Mode, but creating
Panelsets is only possible in Edit Mode. The same is also true for Snapshots.
Some of the features described in this manual will require activating Edit Mode, so if you no-
tice a feature described that you cannot see in your instance of REAKTOR, try activating Edit
Mode.
Play Mode vs. Edit Mode
Edit Mode
 
REAKTOR 6 - Diving Deeper - 14

